1. Neuroscience. 2017 Mar 14;345:243-255. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2016.07.030. 
Epub 2016 Aug 1.

Cognitive inflexibility in Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder.

Gruner P(1), Pittenger C(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Yale University, United States; Learning Based 
Recovery Center, VA Connecticut Health System, United States.
(2)Department of Psychiatry, Yale University, United States; Department of 
Psychology, Yale University, United States; Child Study Center, Yale University, 
United States; Interdepartmental Neuroscience Program, Yale University, United 
States. Electronic address: Christopher.pittenger@yale.edu.

Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder (OCD) is characterized by maladaptive patterns of 
repetitive, inflexible cognition and behavior that suggest a lack of cognitive 
flexibility. Consistent with this clinical observation, many neurocognitive 
studies suggest behavioral and neurobiological abnormalities in cognitive 
flexibility in individuals with OCD. Meta-analytic reviews support a pattern of 
cognitive inflexibility, with effect sizes generally in the medium range. 
Heterogeneity in assessments and the way underlying constructs have been 
operationalized point to the need for better standardization across studies, as 
well as more refined overarching models of cognitive flexibility and executive 
function (EF). Neuropsychological assessments of cognitive flexibility include 
measures of attentional set shifting, reversal and alternation, cued 
task-switching paradigms, cognitive control measures such as the Trail-Making 
and Stroop tasks, and several measures of motor inhibition. Differences in the 
cognitive constructs and neural substrates associated with these measures 
suggest that performance within these different domains should be examined 
separately. Additional factors, such as the number of consistent trials prior to 
a shift and whether a shift is explicitly signaled or must be inferred from a 
change in reward contingencies, may influence performance, and thus mask or 
accentuate deficits. Several studies have described abnormalities in neural 
activation in the absence of differences in behavioral performance, suggesting 
that our behavioral probes may not be adequately sensitive, but also offering 
important insights into potential compensatory processes. The fact that deficits 
of moderate effect size are seen across a broad range of classic 
neuropsychological tests in OCD presents a conceptual challenge, as clinical 
symptomatology suggests greater specificity. Traditional cognitive probes may 
not be sufficient to delineate specific domains of deficit in this and other 
neuropsychiatric disorders; a new generation of behavioral tasks that test more 
specific underlying constructs, supplemented by neuroimaging to provide insight 
into the underlying processes, may be needed.

Copyright © 2016 IBRO. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2016.07.030
PMCID: PMC5288350
PMID: 27491478 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Imaging Neurosci (Camb). 2024 Jun 10;2:1-16. doi: 10.1162/imag_a_00190. 
eCollection 2024 Jun 1.

The relationship between SV2A levels, neural activity, and cognitive function in 
healthy humans: A [11C]UCB-J PET and fMRI study.

Shatalina E(1)(2), Onwordi EC(1)(2)(3)(4), Whitehurst T(1)(2)(3)(4), Whittington 
A(5), Mansur A(5), Arumuham A(1)(2)(6), Statton B(2)(7), Berry A(2)(7), Marques 
TR(1), Gunn RN(5), Natesan S(1)(2), Nour MM(8)(9), Rabiner EA(5), Wall MB(5)(7), 
Howes OD(1)(2)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychosis Studies, Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology and 
Neuroscience, King's College London, London, United Kingdom.
(2)MRC Laboratory of Medical Science, Imperial College London, London, United 
Kingdom.
(3)Centre for Psychiatry and Mental Health, Wolfson Institute of Population 
Health, Queen Mary University of London, London, United Kingdom.
(4)East London NHS Foundation Trust, London, United Kingdom.
(5)Invicro, London, United Kingdom.
(6)South London and Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust, London, United Kingdom.
(7)Faculty of Medicine, Imperial College London, London, United Kingdom.
(8)Departement of Psychiatry, Oxford University, Oxford, United Kingdom.
(9)Max Planck UCL Centre for Computational Psychiatry and Ageing Research, 
University College London, London, United Kingdom.

Synaptic terminal density is thought to influence cognitive function and neural 
activity, yet its role in cognition has not been explored in healthy humans. We 
examined these relationships using [11C]UCB-J positron emission tomography (PET) 
and functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) in 25 healthy adults performing 
cognitive function tasks in the scanner. We found a significant positive 
association between synaptic terminal density, indicated by [11C]UCB-J PET 
distribution volume ratio (DVRcs), and neural activity during task switching 
(PLS-CA, second canonical component, r = 0.63, p = 0.043) with the 
thalamus-putamen data positively contributing to this relationship (PLS-CA 
loading 0.679, exploratory Pearson's correlation r = 0.42, p = 0.044, 
uncorrected). Furthermore, synaptic terminal density predicted switch cost 
(PLS-R, R2 = 0.45, RMSE = 0.06, p = 0.022), with DVRcs negatively correlating 
with switch cost in key brain regions including the dorsolateral prefrontal 
cortex and posterior frontal cortex. Conversely, no significant relationships 
were observed between [11C]UCB-J DVRcs and neural activity or performance 
measures in the N-back working memory task, suggesting interindividual 
differences in synaptic terminal density may be more closely related to some 
cognitive functions and not others.

© 2024 Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Published under a Creative Commons 
Attribution 4.0 International (CC BY 4.0) license.

DOI: 10.1162/imag_a_00190
PMCID: PMC11840333
PMID: 39989611

Conflict of interest statement: Dr. Howes has received investigator-initiated 
research funding from and/or participated in advisory/speaker meetings organised 
by Angellini, Autifony, Biogen, Boehringer-Ingelheim, Eli Lilly, Elysium, 
Heptares, Global Medical Education, Invicro, Jansenn, Karuna, Lundbeck, Merck, 
Neurocrine, Ontrack/ Pangea, Otsuka, Sunovion, Recordati, Roche, Rovi and 
Viatris/ Mylan. He was previously a part-time employee of Lundbeck A/v. Neither 
Dr. Howes nor his family have holdings/a financial stake in any pharmaceutical 
company. Dr. Howes has a patent for the use of dopaminergic imaging. Ilan 
Rabiner, Matt Wall, Alexander Whittington and Ayla Mansur are all employees or 
past employees of Invicro London. Tiago Reis Marques is an employee and founder 
of Pasithea Therapeutics. Other authors have reported no biomedical financial 
interests or potential conflicts of interest.


3. Dev Cogn Neurosci. 2023 Apr;60:101217. doi: 10.1016/j.dcn.2023.101217. Epub 2023 
Feb 15.

Does prefrontal connectivity during task switching help or hinder children's 
performance?

Schwarze SA(1), Laube C(2), Khosravani N(3), Lindenberger U(4), Bunge SA(5), 
Fandakova Y(3).

Author information:
(1)Center for Lifespan Psychology, Max Planck Institute for Human Development, 
Lentzeallee 94, 14195 Berlin, Germany. Electronic address: 
schwarze@mpib-berlin.mpg.de.
(2)Center for Lifespan Psychology, Max Planck Institute for Human Development, 
Lentzeallee 94, 14195 Berlin, Germany; Fresenius University of Applied Sciences, 
Jägerstraße 32, 10117 Berlin, Germany.
(3)Center for Lifespan Psychology, Max Planck Institute for Human Development, 
Lentzeallee 94, 14195 Berlin, Germany.
(4)Center for Lifespan Psychology, Max Planck Institute for Human Development, 
Lentzeallee 94, 14195 Berlin, Germany; Max Planck UCL Centre for Computational 
Psychiatry and Ageing Research, Lentzeallee 94, 14195 Berlin, Germany; Max 
Planck UCL Centre for Computational Psychiatry and Ageing Research, 10-12 
Russell Square, WC1B 5EH London, UK.
(5)Department of Psychology and Helen Wills Neuroscience Institute, University 
of California at Berkeley, 2121 Berkeley Way, Berkeley, CA 94720-1650, USA.

The ability to flexibly switch between tasks is key for goal-directed behavior 
and continues to improve across childhood. Children's task switching 
difficulties are thought to reflect less efficient engagement of sustained and 
transient control processes, resulting in lower performance on blocks that 
intermix tasks (sustained demand) and trials that require a task switch 
(transient demand). Sustained and transient control processes are associated 
with frontoparietal regions, which develop throughout childhood and may 
contribute to task switching development. We examined age differences in the 
modulation of frontoparietal regions by sustained and transient control demands 
in children (8-11 years) and adults. Children showed greater performance costs 
than adults, especially under sustained demand, along with less upregulation of 
sustained and transient control activation in frontoparietal regions. Compared 
to adults, children showed increased connectivity between the inferior frontal 
junction (IFJ) and lateral prefrontal cortex (lPFC) from single to mixed blocks. 
For children whose sustained activation was less adult-like, increased IFJ-lPFC 
connectivity was associated with better performance. Children with more 
adult-like sustained activation showed the inverse effect. These results suggest 
that individual differences in task switching in later childhood at least partly 
depend on the recruitment of frontoparietal regions in an adult-like manner.

Copyright © 2023 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.dcn.2023.101217
PMCID: PMC9969289
PMID: 36807013 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.


4. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci. 2007 May 29;362(1481):917-32. doi: 
10.1098/rstb.2007.2097.

Shifting and stopping: fronto-striatal substrates, neurochemical modulation and 
clinical implications.

Robbins TW(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental Psychology and Behavioural and Clinical 
Neuroscience Institute, University of Cambridge, Downing Street, Cambridge CB2 
3EB, UK. twr2@cam.ac.uk

The neuropsychological basis of attentional set-shifting, task-set switching and 
stop-signal inhibition is reviewed through comparative studies of humans and 
experimental animals. Using human functional neuroimaging, plus 
neuropsychological investigation of patients with frontal damage quantified by 
structural magnetic resonance imaging, and through parallels with effects of 
specific lesions of the prefrontal cortex (PFC) and striatum in rats and 
marmosets, it is possible to define both distinct and overlapping loci for tasks 
such as extra-dimensional shifting and reversal learning, stop-signal reaction 
time and task-set switching. Notably, most of the paradigms implicate a locus in 
the right PFC, specifically the right inferior frontal gyrus, possibly 
associated with processes of response inhibition. The neurochemical modulation 
of fronto-striatal circuitry in parallel with effects on task performance has 
been investigated using specific neuropharmacological agents in animals and by 
human psychopharmacological investigations, sometimes in conjunction with 
functional imaging. Evidence is provided for double dissociations of effects of 
manipulations of prefrontal cortical catecholamine and indoleamine (5-HT) 
systems that have considerable implications in the treatment of disorders such 
as Parkinson's disease, attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder and depression, 
as well as in theoretical notions of how 'fronto-executive' functions are 
subject to state-dependent influences, probably related to stress, arousal and 
motivation.

DOI: 10.1098/rstb.2007.2097
PMCID: PMC2430006
PMID: 17412678 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Soc Cogn Affect Neurosci. 2023 Feb 23;18(1):nsac054. doi: 10.1093/scan/nsac054.

Neural correlates of affective task switching and asymmetric affective task 
switching costs.

Eckart C(1)(2), Kraft D(1)(3), Rademacher L(1)(4), Fiebach CJ(1)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Goethe University Frankfurt, Frankfurt am Main 
60323, Germany.
(2)Department of Psychiatry, Psychosomatic Medicine and Psychotherapy, 
University Hospital, Goethe University, Frankfurt am Main 60528, Germany.
(3)Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, Tübingen Center for Mental 
Health, University of Tübingen, Tübingen 72076, Germany.
(4)Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, University of Lübeck, Lübeck 
23562, Germany.
(5)Brain Imaging Center, Goethe University Frankfurt, Frankfurt am Main 60528, 
Germany.

The control of emotions is of potentially great clinical relevance. Accordingly, 
there has been increasing interest in understanding the cognitive mechanisms 
underlying the ability to switch efficiently between the processing of affective 
and non-affective information. Reports of asymmetrically increased switch costs 
when switching toward the more salient emotion task indicate specific demands in 
the flexible control of emotion. The neural mechanisms underlying affective task 
switching, however, are so far not fully understood. Using functional Magnetic 
Resonance Imaging (MRI) (N = 57), we observed that affective task switching was 
accompanied by increased activity in domain-general fronto-parietal control 
systems. Blood-oxygen-level-dependent (BOLD) activity in the posterior medial 
frontal and anterolateral prefrontal cortex was directly related to affective 
switch costs, indicating that these regions play a particular role in individual 
differences in (affective) task-switching ability. Asymmetric switch costs were 
associated with increased activity in the right inferior frontal and dorsal 
anterior medial prefrontal cortex, two brain regions critical for response 
inhibition. This suggests that asymmetric switch costs might-to a great 
extent-reflect higher demands on inhibitory control of the dominant emotion 
task. These results contribute to a refined understanding of brain systems for 
the flexible control of emotions and thereby identify valuable target systems 
for future clinical research.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press.

DOI: 10.1093/scan/nsac054
PMCID: PMC9949498
PMID: 36226894 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Neuroimage. 2022 Jul 1;254:119126. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2022.119126. Epub 
2022 Mar 22.

Temporally and functionally distinct large-scale brain network dynamics 
supporting task switching.

Mitsuhashi T(1), Sonoda M(2), Firestone E(3), Sakakura K(4), Jeong JW(5), Luat 
AF(6), Sood S(7), Asano E(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Children's Hospital of Michigan, Detroit Medical 
Center, Wayne State University, 3901 Beaubien St, Detroit, MI 48201, USA; 
Department of Neurosurgery, Juntendo University, Tokyo 113-8421, Japan.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Children's Hospital of Michigan, Detroit Medical 
Center, Wayne State University, 3901 Beaubien St, Detroit, MI 48201, USA; 
Department of Neurosurgery, Yokohama City University, Yokohama 236-0004, Japan.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Children's Hospital of Michigan, Detroit Medical 
Center, Wayne State University, 3901 Beaubien St, Detroit, MI 48201, USA; 
Department of Physiology, Wayne State University, Detroit, MI 48201, USA.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, Children's Hospital of Michigan, Detroit Medical 
Center, Wayne State University, 3901 Beaubien St, Detroit, MI 48201, USA; 
Department of Neurosurgery, University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba 305-8575, Japan.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, Children's Hospital of Michigan, Detroit Medical 
Center, Wayne State University, 3901 Beaubien St, Detroit, MI 48201, USA; 
Department of Neurology, Children's Hospital of Michigan, Detroit Medical 
Center, Wayne State University, Detroit, MI 48201, USA.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, Children's Hospital of Michigan, Detroit Medical 
Center, Wayne State University, 3901 Beaubien St, Detroit, MI 48201, USA; 
Department of Neurology, Children's Hospital of Michigan, Detroit Medical 
Center, Wayne State University, Detroit, MI 48201, USA; Department of 
Pediatrics, Central Michigan University, Mount Pleasant, MI 48858, USA.
(7)Department of Neurosurgery, Children's Hospital of Michigan, Detroit Medical 
Center, Wayne State University, Detroit, MI 48201, USA.
(8)Department of Pediatrics, Children's Hospital of Michigan, Detroit Medical 
Center, Wayne State University, 3901 Beaubien St, Detroit, MI 48201, USA; 
Department of Neurology, Children's Hospital of Michigan, Detroit Medical 
Center, Wayne State University, Detroit, MI 48201, USA. Electronic address: 
easano@med.wayne.edu.

OBJECTIVE: Our daily activities require frequent switches among competing 
responses at the millisecond time scale. We determined the spatiotemporal 
characteristics and functional significance of rapid, large-scale brain network 
dynamics during task switching.
METHODS: This cross-sectional study investigated patients with drug-resistant 
focal epilepsy who played a Lumosity cognitive flexibility training game during 
intracranial electroencephalography (iEEG) recording. According to a given task 
rule, unpredictably switching across trials, participants had to swipe the 
screen in the direction the stimulus was pointing or moving. Using this data, we 
described the spatiotemporal characteristics of iEEG high-gamma augmentation 
occurring more intensely during switch than repeat trials, unattributable to the 
effect of task rule (pointing or moving), within-stimulus congruence (the 
direction of stimulus pointing and moving was same or different in a given 
trial), or accuracy of an immediately preceding response. Diffusion-weighted 
imaging (DWI) tractography determined whether distant cortical regions showing 
enhanced activation during task switch trials were directly connected by white 
matter tracts. Trial-by-trial iEEG analysis deduced whether the intensity of 
task switch-related high-gamma augmentation was altered through practice and 
whether high-gamma amplitude predicted the accuracy of an upcoming response 
among switch trials.
RESULTS: The average number of completed trials during five-minute gameplay was 
221.4 per patient (range: 171-285). Task switch trials increased the response 
times, whereas later trials reduced them. Analysis of iEEG signals sampled from 
860 brain sites effectively elucidated the distinct spatiotemporal 
characteristics of task switch, task rule, and post-error-specific high-gamma 
modulations. Post-cue, task switch-related high-gamma augmentation was initiated 
in the right calcarine cortex after 260 ms, right precuneus after 330 ms, right 
entorhinal after 420 ms, and bilateral anterior middle-frontal gyri after 
450 ms. DWI tractography successfully showed the presence of direct white matter 
tracts connecting the right visual areas to the precuneus and anterior 
middle-frontal regions but not between the right precuneus and anterior 
middle-frontal regions. Task-related high-gamma amplitudes in later trials were 
reduced in the calcarine, entorhinal and anterior middle-frontal regions, but 
increased in the precuneus. Functionally, enhanced post-cue precuneus high-gamma 
augmentation improved the accuracy of subsequent responses among switch trials.
CONCLUSIONS: Our multimodal analysis uncovered two temporally and functionally 
distinct network dynamics supporting task switching. High-gamma augmentation in 
the visual-precuneus pathway may reflect the neural process facilitating an 
attentional shift to a given updated task rule. High-gamma activity in the 
visual-dorsolateral prefrontal pathway, rapidly reduced through practice, may 
reflect the cost of executing appropriate stimulus-response translation.

Copyright © 2022 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2022.119126
PMCID: PMC9173207
PMID: 35331870 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest None of the 
authors have disclosures or conflicts of interest regarding this study.


7. Brain Cogn. 2021 Jul;151:105725. doi: 10.1016/j.bandc.2021.105725. Epub 2021 Apr 
28.

Dynamic task-linked switching between brain networks - A tri-network 
perspective.

Shaw SB(1), McKinnon MC(2), Heisz J(3), Becker S(4).

Author information:
(1)Neuroscience Graduate Program, McMaster University, Hamilton, ON, Canada; 
Vector Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Toronto, ON, Canada; Centre for 
Advanced Research in Experimental and Applied Linguistics (ARiEAL), Department 
of Linguistics and Languages, McMaster University, Hamilton, ON, Canada.
(2)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioural Neuroscience, McMaster University, 
Hamilton, ON, Canada; Mood Disorders Program, St. Joseph's Healthcare, Hamilton, 
ON, Canada; Homewood Research Institute, Guelph, ON, Canada; Rotman Research 
Institute, Baycrest Hospital, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(3)Department of Kinesiology, McMaster University, Hamilton, ON, Canada; Rotman 
Research Institute, Baycrest Hospital, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(4)Neuroscience Graduate Program, McMaster University, Hamilton, ON, Canada; 
Department of Psychology Neuroscience & Behaviour, McMaster University, 
Hamilton, ON, Canada; Vector Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Toronto, ON, 
Canada; Centre for Advanced Research in Experimental and Applied Linguistics 
(ARiEAL), Department of Linguistics and Languages, McMaster University, 
Hamilton, ON, Canada; Rotman Research Institute, Baycrest Hospital, Toronto, ON, 
Canada. Electronic address: becker@mcmaster.ca.

The highly influential tri-network model proposed by Menon integrates 3 key 
intrinsic brain networks - the central executive network (CEN), the salience 
network (SN), and the default mode network (DMN), into a single cohesive model 
underlying normal behaviour and cognition. A large body of evidence suggests 
that abnormal intra- and inter- network connectivity between these three 
networks underlies the various behavioural and cognitive dysfunctions observed 
in patients with neuropsychiatric conditions such as PTSD and depression. An 
important prediction of the tri-network model is that the DMN and CEN networks 
are anti-correlated under the control of the SN, such that if a task engages one 
of the two, the SN inhibits the activation of the other. To date most of the 
evidence surrounding the functions of these three core networks comes from 
either resting state analyses or in the context of a single task with respect to 
rest. Few studies have investigated multiple tasks simultaneously or 
characterized the dynamics of task switching. Hence, a careful investigation of 
the temporal dynamics of network activity during task switching is warranted. To 
accomplish this we collected fMRI data from 14 participants that dynamically 
switched between a 2-back working memory task and an autobiographical memory 
retrieval task, designed to activate the CEN, DMN and the SN. The fMRI data were 
used to 1. identify nodes and sub-networks within the three major networks 
involved in task-linked dynamic network switching, 2. characterize the temporal 
pattern of activation of these nodes and sub-networks, and finally 3. 
investigate the causal influence that these nodes and sub-networks exerted on 
each other. Using a combination of multivariate neuroimaging analyses, 
timecourse analyses and multivariate Granger causality measures to study the 
tri-network dynamics, the current study found that the SN co-activates with the 
task-relevant network, providing a mechanistic insight into SN-mediated network 
selection in the context of explicit tasks. Our findings also indicate active 
involvement of the posterior insula and some medial temporal nodes in 
task-linked functions of the SN and DMN, warranting their inclusion as network 
nodes in future studies of the tri-network model. These results add to the 
growing body of evidence showing the complex interplay of CEN, DMN and SN nodes 
and sub-networks required for adequate task-switching, characterizing a 
normative pattern of task-linked network dynamics within the context of Menon's 
tri-network model.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bandc.2021.105725
PMID: 33932747 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Neuroimage. 2003 Nov;20 Suppl 1:S50-7. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2003.09.022.

Within-task switching in the verbal domain.

Gurd JM(1), Weiss PH, Amunts K, Fink GR.

Author information:
(1)University Department of Clinical Neurology, Radcliffe Infirmary,Oxford, OX2 
6HE, UK. jennifer.gurd@clneuro.ox.ac.uk

Task-switching, a term that covers a wide range of different cognitive 
processes, is a topic of considerable current interest. We draw particular 
attention to verbal within-task switching in neurological patients and healthy 
volunteers. The paradigm employs two types of fluency tasks: (i) semantic 
category verbal fluency in which subjects covertly produce words from a 
predefined superordinate semantic category and (ii) automatic speech tasks in 
which subjects produce words from overlearned sequences. In the single-category 
conditions, words are produced from one category at a time; in the switching 
conditions, words are produced alternately from three categories. For example, 
the semantic categories could be fruits, cars, and furniture and the automatic 
categories could be days of the week, letters of the alphabet, and months of the 
year. In a previous fMRI study of healthy volunteers, the main group effect of 
switching (semantic category and automatic speech) relative to single-category 
fluency (semantic category and automatic speech) showed significant activations 
(p < 0.05 corrected) only in bilateral superior posterior parietal cortex, Brain 
125, 1024-1038). There was no significant prefrontal activation as a main effect 
of switching. In this paper we present further results from that experiment 
which show a surprising lack of consistent frontal lobe switch activations in 
single-subject analyses. These findings are discussed in relation to other 
neuroimaging studies of task-switching and the role of convergent 
neuropsychological data from patients with neurodegenerative disease.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2003.09.022
PMID: 14597296 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Front Aging Neurosci. 2016 Oct 18;8:239. doi: 10.3389/fnagi.2016.00239. 
eCollection 2016.

Real-Time fMRI in Neuroscience Research and Its Use in Studying the Aging Brain.

Rana M(1), Varan AQ(2), Davoudi A(3), Cohen RA(4), Sitaram R(5), Ebner NC(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Division of Neuroscience, School of Medicine, 
Pontificia Universidad Católica de ChileSantiago, Chile; Laboratory for 
Brain-Machine Interfaces and Neuromodulation, Pontificia Universidad Católica de 
ChileSantiago, Chile.
(2)Department of Psychology, University of Florida Gainesville, FL, USA.
(3)J. Crayton Pruitt Family Department of Biomedical Engineering, University of 
Florida Gainesville, FL, USA.
(4)Center for Cognitive Aging and Memory, Institute on Aging, University of 
FloridaGainesville, FL, USA; Department of Aging and Geriatric Research, College 
of Medicine, University of FloridaGainesville, FL, USA.
(5)Department of Psychiatry and Division of Neuroscience, School of Medicine, 
Pontificia Universidad Católica de ChileSantiago, Chile; Laboratory for 
Brain-Machine Interfaces and Neuromodulation, Pontificia Universidad Católica de 
ChileSantiago, Chile; Institute for Biological and Medical Engineering, Schools 
of Engineering, Biology and Medicine, Pontificia Universidad Católica de 
ChileSantiago, Chile.
(6)Department of Psychology, University of FloridaGainesville, FL, USA; Center 
for Cognitive Aging and Memory, Institute on Aging, University of 
FloridaGainesville, FL, USA; Department of Aging and Geriatric Research, College 
of Medicine, University of FloridaGainesville, FL, USA.

Cognitive decline is a major concern in the aging population. It is normative to 
experience some deterioration in cognitive abilities with advanced age such as 
related to memory performance, attention distraction to interference, task 
switching, and processing speed. However, intact cognitive functioning in old 
age is important for leading an independent day-to-day life. Thus, studying ways 
to counteract or delay the onset of cognitive decline in aging is crucial. The 
literature offers various explanations for the decline in cognitive performance 
in aging; among those are age-related gray and white matter atrophy, synaptic 
degeneration, blood flow reduction, neurochemical alterations, and change in 
connectivity patterns with advanced age. An emerging literature on neurofeedback 
and Brain Computer Interface (BCI) reports exciting results supporting the 
benefits of volitional modulation of brain activity on cognition and behavior. 
Neurofeedback studies based on real-time functional magnetic resonance imaging 
(rtfMRI) have shown behavioral changes in schizophrenia and behavioral benefits 
in nicotine addiction. This article integrates research on cognitive and brain 
aging with evidence of brain and behavioral modification due to rtfMRI 
neurofeedback. We offer a state-of-the-art description of the rtfMRI technique 
with an eye towards its application in aging. We present preliminary results of 
a feasibility study exploring the possibility of using rtfMRI to train older 
adults to volitionally control brain activity. Based on these first findings, we 
discuss possible implementations of rtfMRI neurofeedback as a novel technique to 
study and alleviate cognitive decline in healthy and pathological aging.

DOI: 10.3389/fnagi.2016.00239
PMCID: PMC5067937
PMID: 27803662


10. Neuroscience. 2021 May 1;461:23-35. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2021.02.030. 
Epub 2021 Mar 4.

Task Switching and the Role of Motor Reprogramming in Parietal Structures.

Petruo VA(1), Beste C(2).

Author information:
(1)Brain and Creativity Institute, Dornsife College of Letters, Arts and 
Sciences, University of Southern California, 3620A McClintock Avenue Bldg. #292, 
Los Angeles, CA 90089 United States.
(2)Cognitive Neurophysiology, Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 
Faculty of Medicine, TU Dresden, Fetscherstrasse 74, 01307 Dresden, Germany. 
Electronic address: christian.beste@uniklinikum-dresden.de.

Human behaviour amazes with extraordinary flexibility and the underlying neural 
mechanisms have often been studied using task switching. Despite extensive 
research, the relative importance of "cognitive" and "motor" aspects during 
switching is unclear. In the current study we examine this question combining 
EEG analysis techniques and source localization to examine whether the selection 
of the response, or processes during the execution of the response, contribute 
most to switching effects. A clear dissociation was observed in the signal 
decomposition, since codes relating to motor aspects play a significant role in 
task switching and the scope of the switching costs. This was not the case for 
signals that denote reaction selection or decision processes that respond to 
selection or basic stimulus processing codes. On a functional neuroanatomical 
level, these modulations in motor processes showed a clear temporal sequence in 
that motor codes are processed primarily in superior parietal regions (Brodman 
area 7) and only then in premotor regions (Brodman area 6). The observed 
modulations may reflect motor reprogramming processes. The study shows how EEG 
signal analysis in combination with brain mapping methods can inform debates on 
theories of human cognitive flexibility.

Copyright © 2021 IBRO. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2021.02.030
PMID: 33675917 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Cortex. 2022 Jan;146:106-115. doi: 10.1016/j.cortex.2021.09.020. Epub 2021 Nov 
3.

Fluid intelligence and naturalistic task impairments after focal brain lesions.

Smith V(1), Pinasco C(2), Achterberg J(3), Mitchell DJ(3), Das T(4), Roca M(5), 
Duncan J(6).

Author information:
(1)MRC Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, 
UK. Electronic address: very.tee@googlemail.com.
(2)Institute of Translational and Cognitive Neuroscience (INCyT), INECO 
Foundation, Favaloro University, Buenos Aires, Argentina.
(3)MRC Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, 
UK.
(4)Department of Radiology, Addenbrooke's Hospital, Cambridge University 
Hospitals, Cambridge, UK.
(5)Institute of Translational and Cognitive Neuroscience (INCyT), INECO 
Foundation, Favaloro University, Buenos Aires, Argentina; National Scientific 
and Technical Research Council (CONICET), Buenos Aires, Argentina.
(6)MRC Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, 
UK; Department of Experimental Psychology, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK. 
Electronic address: John.Duncan@mrc-cbu.cam.ac.uk.

Classical executive tasks, such as Wisconsin card-sorting and verbal fluency, 
are widely used as tests of frontal lobe control functions. Since the pioneering 
work of Shallice and Burgess (1991), it has been known that complex, 
naturalistic tasks can capture deficits that are missed in these classical 
tests. Matching this finding, deficits in several classical tasks are predicted 
by loss of fluid intelligence, linked to damage in a specific cortical 
"multiple-demand" (MD) network, while deficits in a more naturalistic task are 
not. To expand on these previous results, we examined the effect of focal brain 
lesions on three new tests-a modification of the previously-used Hotel task, a 
new test of task switching after extended delays, and a test of decision-making 
in imagined real-life scenarios. As potential predictors of impairment we 
measured volume of damage to a priori MD and default mode (DMN) networks, as 
well as cortical damage outside these networks. Deficits in the three new tasks 
were substantial, but were not explained by loss of fluid intelligence, or by 
volume of damage to either MD or DMN networks. Instead, deficits were associated 
with diverse lesions, and not strongly correlated with one another. The results 
confirm that naturalistic tasks capture cognitive deficits beyond those measured 
by fluid intelligence. We suggest, however, that these deficits may not arise 
from specific control operations required by complex behaviour. Instead, like 
everyday activities, complex tasks combine a rich variety of interacting 
cognitive components, bringing many opportunities for processing to be 
disturbed.

Copyright © 2021 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cortex.2021.09.020
PMCID: PMC8769046
PMID: 34847482 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Cereb Cortex. 2024 Jul 3;34(7):bhae278. doi: 10.1093/cercor/bhae278.

Task and stimulus coding in the multiple-demand network.

Shashidhara S(1)(2), Assem M(2), Glasser MF(3), Duncan J(2).

Author information:
(1)Center for Social and Behaviour Change, Ashoka University, Sonipat, 131029, 
India.
(2)MRC Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit, School of Clinical Medicine, 
University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB27EF, United Kingdom.
(3)Departments of Radiology and Neuroscience, Washington University in St. 
Louis, Saint Louis, MO 63110, United States.

In the human brain, a multiple-demand (MD) network plays a key role in cognitive 
control, with core components in lateral frontal, dorsomedial frontal and 
lateral parietal cortex, and multivariate activity patterns that discriminate 
the contents of many cognitive activities. In prefrontal cortex of the behaving 
monkey, different cognitive operations are associated with very different 
patterns of neural activity, while details of a particular stimulus are encoded 
as small variations on these basic patterns (Sigala et al, 2008). Here, using 
the advanced fMRI methods of the Human Connectome Project and their 360-region 
cortical parcellation, we searched for a similar result in MD activation 
patterns. In each parcel, we compared multivertex patterns for every combination 
of three tasks (working memory, task-switching, and stop-signal) and two 
stimulus classes (faces and buildings). Though both task and stimulus category 
were discriminated in every cortical parcel, the strength of discrimination 
varied strongly across parcels. The different cognitive operations of the three 
tasks were strongly discriminated in MD regions. Stimulus categories, in 
contrast, were most strongly discriminated in a large region of primary and 
higher visual cortex, and intriguingly, in both parietal and frontal lobe 
regions adjacent to core MD regions. In the monkey, frontal neurons show a 
strong pattern of nonlinear mixed selectivity, with activity reflecting specific 
conjunctions of task events. In our data, however, there was limited evidence 
for mixed selectivity; throughout the brain, discriminations of task and 
stimulus combined largely linearly, with a small nonlinear component. In MD 
regions, human fMRI data recapitulate some but not all aspects of 
electrophysiological data from nonhuman primates.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press.

DOI: 10.1093/cercor/bhae278
PMCID: PMC11246790
PMID: 39004756 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Prog Neurobiol. 1998 Jul;55(4):343-61. doi: 10.1016/s0301-0082(98)00011-2.

Neural correlates of attention and arousal: insights from electrophysiology, 
functional neuroimaging and psychopharmacology.

Coull JT(1).

Author information:
(1)Wellcome Department of Cognitive Neurology, Institute of Neurology and 
University College London, UK. j.coull@fil.ion.ucl.ac.uk

Attention and arousal are multi-dimensional psychological processes, which 
interact closely with one another. The neural substrates of attention, as well 
as the interaction between arousal and attention, are discussed in this review. 
After a brief discussion of psychological and neuropsychological theories of 
attention, event-related potential correlates of attention are discussed. 
Essentially, attention acts to modulate stimulus-induced electrical potentials 
(N100/P100, P300, N400), rather than generating any unique potentials of its 
own. Functional neuroimaging studies of attentional orienting, selective 
attention, divided attention and sustained attention (and its inter-dependence 
on underlying levels of arousal) are then reviewed. A distinction is drawn 
between the brain areas which are crucially involved in the top-down modulation 
of attention (the 'sources' of attention) and those sensory-association areas 
whose activity is modulated by attention (the 'sites' of attentional 
expression). Frontal and parietal (usually right-lateralised) cortices and 
thalamus are most often associated with the source of attentional modulation. 
Also, the use of functional neuroimaging to test explicit hypotheses about 
psychological theories of attention is emphasised. These experimental paradigms 
form the basis for a 'new generation' of functional imaging studies which 
exploit the dynamic aspect of imaging and demonstrate how it can be used as more 
than just a 'brain mapping' device. Finally, a review of psychopharmacological 
studies in healthy human volunteers outlines the contributions of the 
noradrenergic, cholinergic and dopaminergic neurotransmitter systems to the 
neurochemical modulation of human attention and arousal. While, noradrenergic 
and cholinergic systems are involved in 'low-level' aspects of attention (e.g. 
attentional orienting), the dopaminergic system is associated with more 
'executive' aspects of attention such as attentional set-shifting or working 
memory.

DOI: 10.1016/s0301-0082(98)00011-2
PMID: 9654384 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Hum Brain Mapp. 2014 May;35(5):2459-69. doi: 10.1002/hbm.22341. Epub 2013 Aug 2.

Task switching in traumatic brain injury relates to cortico-subcortical 
integrity.

Leunissen I(1), Coxon JP, Caeyenberghs K, Michiels K, Sunaert S, Swinnen SP.

Author information:
(1)Movement Control and Neuroplasticity Research Group, Department of 
Kinesiology, Group Biomedical Sciences, KU Leuven.

Suppressing and flexibly adapting actions are a critical part of our daily 
behavioral repertoire. Traumatic brain injury (TBI) patients show clear 
impairments in this type of action control; however, the underlying mechanisms 
are poorly understood. Here, we tested whether white matter integrity of 
cortico-subcortical pathways could account for impairments in task switching, an 
important component of executive functioning. Twenty young adults with TBI and 
eighteen controls performed a switching task requiring attention to global 
versus local stimulus features. Diffusion weighted images were acquired and 
whole brain tract-based spatial statistics (TBSS) were used to explore where 
white matter damage was associated with switching impairment. A crossing fiber 
model and probabilistic tractography further identified the specific fiber 
populations. Relative to controls, patients with a history of TBI had a higher 
switch cost and were less accurate. The TBI group showed a widespread decline in 
fractional anisotropy (FA) throughout the TBSS skeleton. FA in the superior 
corona radiata showed a negative relationship with switch cost. More 
specifically, this involved cortico-subcortical loops with the 
(pre-)supplementary motor area and superior frontal gyrus. These findings 
provide evidence for damage to frontal-subcortical projections in TBI, which is 
associated with task switching impairments.

Copyright © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/hbm.22341
PMCID: PMC6869801
PMID: 23913872 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Sensors (Basel). 2022 Oct 21;22(20):8036. doi: 10.3390/s22208036.

Reorganization of Brain Functional Network during Task Switching before and 
after Mental Fatigue.

Zhong H(1)(2), Wang J(1)(2), Li H(3)(4), Tian J(1)(5), Fang J(1)(5), Xu Y(1)(5), 
Jiao W(1)(5), Li G(1)(6).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Urban Rail Transit Intelligent Operation and Maintenance 
Technology & Equipment of Zhejiang Provincial, Zhejiang Normal University, 
Jinhua 321004, China.
(2)College of Mathematics and Computer Science, Zhejiang Normal University, 
Jinhua 321004, China.
(3)College of Teacher Education, Zhejiang Normal University, Jinhua 321004, 
China.
(4)Key Laboratory of Intelligent Education Technology and Application, Zhejiang 
Normal University, Jinhua 321004, China.
(5)College of Engineering, Zhejiang Normal University, Jinhua 321004, China.
(6)College of Mathematical Medicine, Zhejiang Normal University, Jinhua 321004, 
China.

Mental fatigue is a widely studied topic on account of its serious negative 
effects. But how the neural mechanism of task switching before and after mental 
fatigue remains a question. To this end, this study aims to use brain functional 
network features to explore the answer to this question. Specifically, 
task-state EEG signals were recorded from 20 participants. The tasks include a 
400-s 2-back-task (2-BT), followed by a 6480-s of mental arithmetic task (MAT), 
and then a 400-s 2-BT. Network features and functional connections were 
extracted and analyzed based on the selected task switching states, referred to 
from Pre_2-BT to Pre_MAT before mental fatigue and from Post_MAT to Post_2-BT 
after mental fatigue. The results showed that mental fatigue has been 
successfully induced by long-term MAT based on the significant changes in 
network characteristics and the high classification accuracy of 98% obtained 
with Support Vector Machines (SVM) between Pre_2-BT and Post_2-BT. when the task 
switched from Pre_2-BT to Pre_MAT, delta and beta rhythms exhibited significant 
changes among all network features and the selected functional connections 
showed an enhanced trend. As for the task switched from Post_MAT to Post_2-BT, 
the network features and selected functional connectivity of beta rhythm were 
opposite to the trend of task switching before mental fatigue. Our findings 
provide new insights to understand the neural mechanism of the brain in the 
process of task switching and indicate that the network features and functional 
connections of beta rhythm can be used as neural markers for task switching 
before and after mental fatigue.

DOI: 10.3390/s22208036
PMCID: PMC9611295
PMID: 36298387 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The 
funders had no role in the design of the study; in the collection, analyses, or 
interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript, or in the decision to 
publish the results.


16. Curr Opin Neurobiol. 2007 Apr;17(2):251-7. doi: 10.1016/j.conb.2007.03.009. Epub 
2007 Mar 26.

Emotional and cognitive changes during adolescence.

Yurgelun-Todd D(1).

Author information:
(1)Brain Imaging Center, McLean Hospital, 115 Mill Street, Belmont, MA 02478, 
USA. ytodd@mclean.harvard.edu

Adolescence is a critical period for maturation of neurobiological processes 
that underlie higher cognitive functions and social and emotional behavior. 
Recent studies have applied new advances in magnetic resonance imaging to 
increase understanding of the neurobiological changes that occur during the 
transition from childhood to early adulthood. Structural imaging data indicate 
progressive and regressive changes in the relative volumes of specific brain 
regions, although total brain volume is not significantly altered. The 
prefrontal cortex matures later than other regions and its development is 
paralleled by increased abilities in abstract reasoning, attentional shifting, 
response inhibition and processing speed. Changes in emotional capacity, 
including improvements in affective modulation and discrimination of emotional 
cues, are also seen during adolescence. Functional imaging studies using 
cognitive and affective challenges have shown that frontal cortical networks 
undergo developmental changes in processing. In summary, brain regions that 
underlie attention, reward evaluation, affective discrimination, response 
inhibition and goal-directed behavior undergo structural and functional 
re-organization throughout late childhood and early adulthood. Evidence from 
recent imaging studies supports a model by which the frontal cortex adopts an 
increasingly regulatory role. These neurobiological changes are believed to 
contribute, in part, to the range in cognitive and affective behavior seen 
during adolescence.

DOI: 10.1016/j.conb.2007.03.009
PMID: 17383865 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


17. J Neurosci. 2016 Apr 6;36(14):3978-87. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2517-14.2016.

Brain Signal Variability Differentially Affects Cognitive Flexibility and 
Cognitive Stability.

Armbruster-Genç DJ(1), Ueltzhöffer K(2), Fiebach CJ(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Goethe University Frankfurt, D-60323 Frankfurt am 
Main, Germany, Bernstein Center for Computational Neuroscience, Heidelberg 
University, D-68161 Mannheim, Germany, Department of Neuroradiology, Heidelberg 
University, D-69120 Heidelberg, Germany, armbruster-genc@psych.uni-frankfurt.de.
(2)Department of Psychology, Goethe University Frankfurt, D-60323 Frankfurt am 
Main, Germany, Bernstein Center for Computational Neuroscience, Heidelberg 
University, D-68161 Mannheim, Germany, Department of Neuroradiology, Heidelberg 
University, D-69120 Heidelberg, Germany.
(3)Department of Psychology, Goethe University Frankfurt, D-60323 Frankfurt am 
Main, Germany, Bernstein Center for Computational Neuroscience, Heidelberg 
University, D-68161 Mannheim, Germany, Department of Neuroradiology, Heidelberg 
University, D-69120 Heidelberg, Germany, Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition, 
and Behaviour, Radboud University, 6525 EN Nijmegen, The Netherlands, and IDeA 
Center for Individual Development and Adaptive Education, D-60486 Frankfurt am 
Main, Germany.

Recent research yielded the intriguing conclusion that, in healthy adults, 
higher levels of variability in neuronal processes are beneficial for cognitive 
functioning. Beneficial effects of variability in neuronal processing can also 
be inferred from neurocomputational theories of working memory, albeit this 
holds only for tasks requiring cognitive flexibility. However, cognitive 
stability, i.e., the ability to maintain a task goal in the face of irrelevant 
distractors, should suffer under high levels of brain signal variability. To 
directly test this prediction, we studied both behavioral and brain signal 
variability during cognitive flexibility (i.e., task switching) and cognitive 
stability (i.e., distractor inhibition) in a sample of healthy human subjects 
and developed an efficient and easy-to-implement analysis approach to assess 
BOLD-signal variability in event-related fMRI task paradigms. Results show a 
general positive effect of neural variability on task performance as assessed by 
accuracy measures. However, higher levels of BOLD-signal variability in the left 
inferior frontal junction area result in reduced error rate costs during task 
switching and thus facilitate cognitive flexibility. In contrast, variability in 
the same area has a detrimental effect on cognitive stability, as shown in a 
negative effect of variability on response time costs during distractor 
inhibition. This pattern was mirrored at the behavioral level, with higher 
behavioral variability predicting better task switching but worse distractor 
inhibition performance. Our data extend previous results on brain signal 
variability by showing a differential effect of brain signal variability that 
depends on task context, in line with predictions from computational theories.
SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT: Recent neuroscientific research showed that the human 
brain signal is intrinsically variable and suggested that this variability 
improves performance. Computational models of prefrontal neural networks predict 
differential effects of variability for different behavioral situations 
requiring either cognitive flexibility or stability. However, this hypothesis 
has so far not been put to an empirical test. In this study, we assessed 
cognitive flexibility and cognitive stability, and, besides a generally positive 
effect of neural variability on accuracy measures, we show that neural 
variability in a prefrontal brain area at the inferior frontal junction is 
differentially associated with performance: higher levels of variability are 
beneficial for the effectiveness of task switching (cognitive flexibility) but 
detrimental for the efficiency of distractor inhibition (cognitive stability).

Copyright © 2016 the authors 0270-6474/16/363978-10$15.00/0.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2517-14.2016
PMCID: PMC6705511
PMID: 27053205 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Brain Imaging Behav. 2025 Feb;19(1):50-71. doi: 10.1007/s11682-024-00921-7. Epub 
2024 Oct 29.

Mapping common and distinct brain correlates among cognitive flexibility tasks: 
concordant evidence from meta-analyses.

Chuikova ZV(1)(2), Filatov AA(3), Faber AY(3), Arsalidou M(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Cognition and Decision making, Institute for Cognitive 
Neuroscience, HSE University, Moscow, Russian Federation. zhanna7496@mail.ru.
(2)Department of Pedagogy and Medical Psychology, Sechenov University, Moscow, 
Russian Federation. zhanna7496@mail.ru.
(3)Laboratory for Cognitive Research, School of Psychology, Faculty of Social 
Sciences, HSE University, Moscow, Russian Federation.
(4)York University, Toronto, Canada. marie.arsalidou@gmail.com.
(5)NeuroPsyLab.com, Toronto, Canada. marie.arsalidou@gmail.com.

Cognitive flexibility allows individuals to switch between different tasks, 
strategies, or ideas; an ability that is important for everyday life. The 
Wisconsin card sorting test (WCST) and task switching paradigm (TSP) are popular 
measures of cognitive flexibility. Although both tasks require switching, the 
TSP requires participants to memorize switching rules and retrieve them when 
they view a cue (rule-retrieval), whereas the classic WCST requires participants 
to discover the switching rule via trial-and-error (rule-discovery). Many 
functional magnetic resonance imaging studies have examined brain responses to 
these tasks. Extant meta-analyses show concordance in activation in a widespread 
set of areas including frontal, parietal, and cingulate cortices. Critically, 
past meta-analyses have not specifically examined brain correlates associated 
with rule derivation (i.e., rule-discovery vs. rule-retrieval) in cognitive 
flexibility tasks. We examine for the first time common and distinct concordance 
in brain responses to rule-discovery (i.e., WCST) and rule-retrieval (i.e., 
TSP), as well as TSP subtypes using quantitative meta-analyses. We analyzed data 
from 69 eligible articles with a total of 1617 young-adult participants. 
Conjunction results show concordance in common fronto-parietal areas 
predominantly in the left hemisphere. Contrast analyses show that rule-discovery 
required increased involvement in multiple cortical and subcortical regions such 
as frontopolar (Brodmann Area 10), parietal, insular cortex, thalamus and 
caudate nucleus predominantly in the right hemisphere. No significant 
differences in concordance were observed among the three, task switching 
paradigm sub-types. We propose a neuroanatomical model of cognitive flexibility 
and discuss theoretical and practical applications.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s11682-024-00921-7
PMCID: PMC11846771
PMID: 39467932 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Consent for publication: Was 
provided. Competing interests: The authors declare no competing interests. 
Ethics approval: Not applicable. Consent to participate: Not applicable.


19. Biol Psychiatry. 2021 Jan 15;89(2):172-183. doi: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2020.05.010. 
Epub 2020 May 20.

Brain Mechanisms Supporting Flexible Cognition and Behavior in Adolescents With 
Autism Spectrum Disorder.

Uddin LQ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Miami, Coral Gables, and the 
Neuroscience Program, University of Miami Miller School of Medicine, Miami, 
Florida. Electronic address: l.uddin@miami.edu.

Cognitive flexibility enables appropriate responses to a changing environment 
and is associated with positive life outcomes. Adolescence, with its increased 
focus on transitioning to independent living, presents particular challenges for 
youths with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) who often struggle to behave in a 
flexible way when faced with challenges. This review focuses on brain mechanisms 
underlying the development of flexible cognition during adolescence and how 
these neural systems are affected in ASD. Neuroimaging studies of task switching 
and set-shifting provide evidence for atypical lateral frontoparietal and 
midcingulo-insular network activation during cognitive flexibility task 
performance in individuals with ASD. Recent work also examines how intrinsic 
brain network dynamics support flexible cognition. These dynamic functional 
connectivity studies provide evidence for alterations in the number of 
transitions between brain states, as well as hypervariability of functional 
connections in adolescents with ASD. Future directions for the field include 
addressing issues related to measurement of cognitive flexibility using a 
combination of metrics with ecological and construct validity. Heterogeneity of 
executive function ability in ASD must also be parsed to determine which 
individuals will benefit most from targeted training to improve flexibility. The 
influence of pubertal hormones on brain network development and cognitive 
maturation in adolescents with ASD is another area requiring further 
exploration. Finally, the intriguing possibility that bilingualism might be 
associated with preserved cognitive flexibility in ASD should be further 
examined. Addressing these open questions will be critical for future 
translational neuroscience investigations of cognitive and behavioral 
flexibility in adolescents with ASD.

Copyright © 2020 Society of Biological Psychiatry. Published by Elsevier Inc. 
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2020.05.010
PMCID: PMC7677208
PMID: 32709415 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosures: Dr. Uddin reports no biomedical 
financial interests or potential conflicts of interest.


20. Psychophysiology. 2018 Sep;55(9):e13091. doi: 10.1111/psyp.13091. Epub 2018 Apr 
22.

Coupling of respiration and attention via the locus coeruleus: Effects of 
meditation and pranayama.

Melnychuk MC(1), Dockree PM(1), O'Connell RG(1), Murphy PR(2), Balsters JH(3), 
Robertson IH(4).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Neuroscience, Trinity College Dublin, Dublin, Ireland.
(2)Department of Neurophysiology and Pathophysiology, University Medical Center 
Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany.
(3)Department of Psychology, Royal Holloway University of London, Egham, United 
Kingdom.
(4)Institute of Neuroscience and Global Brain Health Institute, Trinity College 
Dublin, Dublin, Ireland.

The locus coeruleus (LC) has established functions in both attention and 
respiration. Good attentional performance requires optimal levels of tonic LC 
activity, and must be matched to task consistently. LC neurons are 
chemosensitive, causing respiratory phrenic nerve firing to increase frequency 
with higher CO2 levels, and as CO2 level varies with the phase of respiration, 
tonic LC activity should exhibit fluctuations at respiratory frequency. Top-down 
modulation of tonic LC activity from brain areas involved in attentional 
regulation, intended to optimize LC firing to suit task requirements, may have 
respiratory consequences as well, as increases in LC activity influence phrenic 
nerve firing. We hypothesize that, due to the physiological and functional 
overlaps of attentional and respiratory functions of the LC, this small 
neuromodulatory nucleus is ideally situated to act as a mechanism of 
synchronization between respiratory and attentional systems, giving rise to a 
low-amplitude oscillation that enables attentional flexibility, but may also 
contribute to unintended destabilization of attention. Meditative and pranayama 
practices result in attentional, emotional, and physiological enhancements that 
may be partially due to the LC's pivotal role as the nexus in this coupled 
system. We present original findings of synchronization between respiration and 
LC activity (via fMRI and pupil dilation) and provide evidence of a relationship 
between respiratory phase modulation and attentional performance. We also 
present a mathematical dynamical systems model of respiratory-LC-attentional 
coupling, review candidate neurophysiological mechanisms of changes in coupling 
dynamics, and discuss implications for attentional theory, meditation, and 
pranayama, and possible therapeutic applications.

© 2018 Society for Psychophysiological Research.

DOI: 10.1111/psyp.13091
PMID: 29682753 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Mol Psychiatry. 2022 Jan;27(1):514-524. doi: 10.1038/s41380-021-01047-8. Epub 
2021 Mar 1.

A neural model of vulnerability and resilience to stress-related disorders 
linked to differential susceptibility.

Homberg JR(1), Jagiellowicz J(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cognitive Neuroscience, Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition 
and Behavior, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, The Netherlands. 
judith.homberg@radboudumc.nl.
(2)Highly Sensitive Society, Cambridge, ON, Canada.

Expert opinion remains divided concerning the impact of putative risk factors on 
vulnerability to depression and other stress-related disorders. A large body of 
literature has investigated gene by environment interactions, particularly 
between the serotonin transporter polymorphism (5-HTTLPR) and negative 
environments, on the risk for depression. However, fewer studies have 
simultaneously investigated the outcomes in both negative and positive 
environments, which could explain some of the inconclusive findings. This is 
embodied by the concept of differential susceptibility, i.e., the idea that 
certain common gene polymorphisms, prenatal factors, and traits make some 
individuals not only disproportionately more susceptible and responsive to 
negative, vulnerability-promoting environments, but also more sensitive and 
responsive to positive, resilience-enhancing environmental conditions. Although 
this concept from the field of developmental psychology is well accepted and 
supported by behavioral findings, it is striking that its implementation in 
neuropsychiatric research is limited and that underlying neural mechanisms are 
virtually unknown. Based on neuroimaging studies that examined how factors 
mediating differential susceptibility affect brain function, we posit that 
environmental sensitivity manifests in increased salience network activity, 
increased salience and default mode network connectivity, and increased salience 
and central executive network connectivity. These changes in network function 
may bring about automatic exogenous attention for positive and negative stimuli 
and flexible attentional set-shifting. We conclude with a call to action; 
unraveling the neural mechanisms through which differential susceptibility 
factors mediate vulnerability and resilience may lead us to personalized 
preventive interventions.

© 2021. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Limited part 
of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1038/s41380-021-01047-8
PMID: 33649455 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


22. J Neurosci. 2022 Jun 15;42(24):4867-4878. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0816-21.2022. 
Epub 2022 May 12.

Brain Functional Connectivity Mapping of Behavioral Flexibility in Rhesus 
Monkeys.

Grant KA(1)(2)(3), Newman N(4), Lynn C(4), Davenport C(4), Gonzales S(4), Cuzon 
Carlson VC(4)(2)(3), Kroenke CD(4)(2)(5).

Author information:
(1)Division of Neuroscience, Oregon National Primate Research Center, Oregon 
Health & Science University, Beaverton, Oregon 97006 grantka@ohsu.edu.
(2)Department of Behavioral Neuroscience, Oregon Health & Science University, 
Portland, Oregon 97239.
(3)Portland Alcohol Research Center, Oregon Health & Science University, 
Portland, Oregon 97239.
(4)Division of Neuroscience, Oregon National Primate Research Center, Oregon 
Health & Science University, Beaverton, Oregon 97006.
(5)Advanced Imaging Research Center, Oregon Health & Science University, 
Portland, Oregon 97239.

The predisposition to engage in autonomous habitual behaviors has been 
associated with behavioral disorders, such as obsessive-compulsive disorder and 
addiction. Attentional set-shifting tasks (ASSTs), which incorporate changes 
governing the association of discriminative stimuli with contingent 
reinforcement, are commonly used to measure underlying processes of 
cognitive/behavioral flexibility. The purpose of this study was to identify 
primate brain networks that mediate trait-like deficits in ASST performance 
using resting-state fMRI. A self-pacing ASST was administered to three cohorts 
of rhesus monkeys (total n = 35, 18 female). Increased performance over 30 
consecutive sessions segregated the monkeys into two populations, termed High 
Performers (HP, n = 17) and Low Performers (LP, n = 17), with one anomaly. 
Compared with LPs, HPs had higher rates of improving performance over sessions 
and completed the 8 sets/sessions with fewer errors. LP monkeys, on the other 
hand, spent most of each session in the first set and often did not acquire the 
first reversal. A whole-brain independent components analysis of resting-state 
fMRI under isoflurane identified four strong networks. Of these, a dual 
regression analysis revealed that a designated "executive control network," 
differed between HPs and LPs. Specific areas of connectivity in the rhesus 
executive control network, including frontal cortices (ventrolateral, 
ventromedial, and orbital) and the dorsal striatum (caudate, putamen) correlated 
with perseverative errors and response latency. Overall, the results identify 
trait-like characteristics of behavioral flexibility that are associated with 
correlated brain activity involving specific nuclei of frontostriatal 
networks.SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT Resting state functional connectivity MRI in 
rhesus monkeys identified specific nuclei in frontostriatal circuitry that were 
associated with population differences in perseverative and impulsive aspects of 
cognitive flexibility.

Copyright © 2022 the authors.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0816-21.2022
PMCID: PMC9188385
PMID: 35552233 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Neuroimage. 2019 Aug 1;196:59-67. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2019.03.075. Epub 
2019 Apr 4.

Resting state functional connectivity and cognitive task-related activation of 
the human claustrum.

Krimmel SR(1), White MG(2), Panicker MH(3), Barrett FS(4), Mathur BN(5), 
Seminowicz DA(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neural and Pain Sciences, School of Dentistry, and Center to 
Advance Chronic Pain Research, University of Maryland, Baltimore, MD, 21201, 
USA.
(2)Department of Biology, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, 94305, USA.
(3)Department of Pharmacology, School of Medicine, University of Maryland, 
Baltimore, MD, 21201, USA.
(4)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Johns Hopkins University 
School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, 21224, USA.
(5)Department of Pharmacology, School of Medicine, University of Maryland, 
Baltimore, MD, 21201, USA. Electronic address: bmathur@som.umaryland.edu.

Structural and functional analyses of the human claustrum, a poorly understood 
telencephalic gray matter structure, are hampered by its sheet-like anatomical 
arrangement. Here, we first describe a functional magnetic resonance imaging 
(fMRI) method to reveal claustrum signal with no linear relationship with 
adjacent regions in human subjects. We applied this approach to resting state 
functional connectivity (RSFC) analysis of the claustrum at high resolution 
(1.5 mm isotropic voxels) using a 7T dataset (n = 20) and a separate 3T dataset 
for replication (n = 35). We then assessed claustrum activation during 
performance of a cognitive task, the multi-source interference task, at 3T 
(n = 33). Extensive functional connectivity was observed between claustrum and 
cortical regions associated with cognitive control, including anterior 
cingulate, prefrontal and parietal cortices. Cognitive task performance was 
associated with widespread activation and deactivation that overlapped with the 
cortical areas showing functional connectivity to the claustrum. Furthermore, 
during high cognitive conflict conditions of the task, the claustrum was 
significantly activated at the onset of the task, but not during the remainder 
of the difficult condition. Both of these findings suggest that the human 
claustrum can be functionally isolated with fMRI, and that it may play a role in 
cognitive control, and specifically task switching, independent of sensorimotor 
processing.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2019.03.075
PMCID: PMC6629463
PMID: 30954711 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest No conflicts of interest 
to disclose.


24. Hum Brain Mapp. 2013 Jan;34(1):12-35. doi: 10.1002/hbm.21420. Epub 2011 Oct 14.

The many faces of preparatory control in task switching: reviewing a decade of 
fMRI research.

Ruge H(1), Jamadar S, Zimmermann U, Karayanidis F.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Neuroimaging Center, Department of Psychology and 
Institute of General Psychology, Biopsychology, and Methods of Psychology, 
Technische Universität Dresden, Germany. ruge@psychologie.tu-dresden.de

A large body of behavioural research has used the cued task-switching paradigm 
to characterize the nature of trial-by-trial preparatory adjustments that enable 
fluent task implementation when demands on cognitive flexibility are high. This 
work reviews the growing number of fMRI studies on the same topic, mostly 
focusing on the central hypothesis that preparatory adjustments should be 
indicated by enhanced prefrontal and parietal BOLD activation in task switch 
when compared with task repeat trials under conditions that enable advance task 
preparation. The evaluation of this straight-forward hypothesis reveals 
surprisingly heterogeneous results regarding both the precise localization and 
the very existence of switch-related preparatory activation. Explanations for 
these inconsistencies are considered on two levels. First, we discuss 
methodological issues regarding (i) the possible impact of different 
fMRI-specific experimental design modifications and (ii) statistical uncertainty 
in the context of massively multivariate imaging data. Second, we discuss 
explanations related to the multidimensional nature of task preparation itself. 
Specifically, the precise localization and the size of switch-related 
preparatory activation might depend on the differential interplay of 
hierarchical control via abstract task goals and attentional versus 
action-directed preparatory processes. We argue that different preparatory modes 
can be adopted relying either on advance goal activation alone or on the advance 
resolution of competition within action sets or attentional sets. Importantly, 
while either mode can result in a reduction of behavioral switch cost, only the 
latter two are supposed to be associated with enhanced switch versus repeat BOLD 
activation in prepared trial conditions.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/hbm.21420
PMCID: PMC6870098
PMID: 21998090 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Biol Psychiatry Cogn Neurosci Neuroimaging. 2025 Aug;10(8):823-832. doi: 
10.1016/j.bpsc.2025.02.007. Epub 2025 Feb 24.

Mitochondria and Cognition: An [(18)F]BCPP-EF Positron Emission Tomography Study 
of Mitochondrial Complex I Levels and Brain Activation During Task Switching.

Shatalina E(1), Whitehurst T(2), Onwordi EC(3), Whittington A(4), Mansur A(4), 
Arumuham A(5), Marques TR(6), Gunn RN(4), Natesan S(7), Nour MM(8), Rabiner 
EA(4), Wall MB(9), Howes OD(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychosis Studies, Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology and 
Neuroscience, King's College London, London, United Kingdom; Medical Research 
Council Laboratory of Medical Science, Imperial College London, London, United 
Kingdom. Electronic address: ekaterina.shatalina@kcl.ac.uk.
(2)Department of Psychosis Studies, Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology and 
Neuroscience, King's College London, London, United Kingdom; Medical Research 
Council Laboratory of Medical Science, Imperial College London, London, United 
Kingdom; East London NHS Foundation Trust, London, United Kingdom.
(3)Department of Psychosis Studies, Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology and 
Neuroscience, King's College London, London, United Kingdom; Medical Research 
Council Laboratory of Medical Science, Imperial College London, London, United 
Kingdom; Centre for Psychiatry and Mental Health, Wolfson Institute of 
Population Health, Queen Mary University of London, London, United Kingdom; East 
London NHS Foundation Trust, London, United Kingdom.
(4)Invicro, London, United Kingdom.
(5)Department of Psychosis Studies, Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology and 
Neuroscience, King's College London, London, United Kingdom; Medical Research 
Council Laboratory of Medical Science, Imperial College London, London, United 
Kingdom; South London and Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust, London, United Kingdom.
(6)Department of Psychosis Studies, Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology and 
Neuroscience, King's College London, London, United Kingdom.
(7)Department of Psychosis Studies, Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology and 
Neuroscience, King's College London, London, United Kingdom; Medical Research 
Council Laboratory of Medical Science, Imperial College London, London, United 
Kingdom.
(8)Department of Psychiatry, Oxford University, Oxford, United Kingdom; Max 
Planck University College London Centre for Computational Psychiatry and Ageing 
Research, University College London, London, United Kingdom.
(9)Invicro, London, United Kingdom; Faculty of Medicine, Imperial College 
London, London, United Kingdom.

BACKGROUND: Mitochondrial complex I is the largest enzyme complex in the 
respiratory chain and can be noninvasively measured using [18F]BCPP-EF positron 
emission tomography (PET). Neurological conditions associated with mitochondria 
complex I pathology are also associated with altered blood oxygen 
level-dependent (BOLD) response and impairments in cognition. In this study, we 
aimed to investigate the relationship between mitochondrial complex I levels, 
cognitive function, and associated neural activity during task switching in 
healthy humans.
METHODS: Cognitively healthy adults (N = 23) underwent [18F]BCPP-EF PET scans 
and functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) while performing a 
task-switching exercise. Task performance metrics included switch cost and 
switching accuracy. Data were analyzed using linear mixed-effects models and 
partial least squares regression (PLS-R).
RESULTS: We found significant positive associations between [18F]BCPP-EF volume 
of distribution (VT) and the task-switching fMRI response (β = 3.351, SE = 1.01, 
z = 3.249, p = .001). Positive Pearson's correlations between [18F]BCPP-EF VT 
and the fMRI response were observed in the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (r = 
0.61, p = .0019), insula (r = 0.46, p = .0264), parietal precuneus (r = 0.51, p 
= .0139), and anterior cingulate cortex (r = 0.45, p = .0293). [18F]BCPP-EF VT 
across task-relevant regions was associated with task switching accuracy (PLS-R, 
R2 = 0.48, root mean square error [RMSE] = 0.154, p = .011) and with switch cost 
(PLS-R, R2 = 0.38, RMSE = 0.07, p = .048).
CONCLUSIONS: Higher mitochondrial complex I levels may underlie an individual's 
ability to exhibit a stronger BOLD response during task switching and are 
associated with better task-switching performance. This provides the first 
evidence linking the BOLD response with mitochondrial complex I and suggests a 
possible biological mechanism for the aberrant BOLD response in conditions 
associated with mitochondrial complex I dysfunction that should be tested in 
future studies.

Copyright © 2025 Society of Biological Psychiatry. Published by Elsevier Inc. 
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bpsc.2025.02.007
PMID: 40010687 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Cortex. 2015 Apr;65:173-83. doi: 10.1016/j.cortex.2015.01.016. Epub 2015 Feb 7.

Domain-independent neural underpinning of task-switching: an fMRI investigation.

Vallesi A(1), Arbula S(2), Capizzi M(2), Causin F(3), D'Avella D(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosciences: SNPSRR, Universitá degli Studi di Padova, Italy; 
Centro di Neuroscienze Cognitive, University of Padova, Italy. Electronic 
address: antonino.vallesi@unipd.it.
(2)Department of Neurosciences: SNPSRR, Universitá degli Studi di Padova, Italy.
(3)Neuroradiology Unit, Azienda Ospedaliera di Padova, Italy.
(4)Department of Neurosciences: SNPSRR, Universitá degli Studi di Padova, Italy; 
Centro di Neuroscienze Cognitive, University of Padova, Italy.

The ability to shift between different tasks according to internal or external 
demands, which is at the core of our behavioral flexibility, has been generally 
linked to the functionality of left fronto-parietal regions. Traditionally, the 
left and right hemispheres have also been associated with verbal and spatial 
processing, respectively. We therefore investigated with functional MRI whether 
the processes engaged during task-switching interact in the brain with the 
domain of the tasks to be switched, that is, verbal or spatial. Importantly, 
physical stimuli were exactly the same and participants' performance was matched 
between the two domains. The fMRI results showed a clearly left-lateralized 
involvement of fronto-parietal regions when contrasting task-switching versus 
single task blocks in the context of verbal rules. A more bilateral pattern, 
especially in the prefrontal cortex, was instead observed for switching between 
spatial tasks. Moreover, while a conjunction analysis showed that the core 
regions involved in task-switching, independently of the switching context, were 
localized both in left inferior prefrontal and parietal cortices and in 
bilateral supplementary motor area, a direct analysis of functional 
lateralization revealed that hemispheric asymmetries in the frontal lobes were 
more biased toward the left side for the verbal domain than for the spatial one 
and vice versa. Overall, these findings highlight the role of left 
fronto-parietal regions in task-switching, above and beyond the specific task 
requirements, but also show that hemispheric asymmetries may be modulated by the 
more specific nature of the tasks to be performed during task-switching.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cortex.2015.01.016
PMID: 25734897 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Neuroscience. 2020 Sep 15;444:43-53. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2020.07.029. 
Epub 2020 Jul 25.

Effects of Nicotine on Task Switching and Distraction in Non-smokers. An fMRI 
Study.

Ahrens S(1), Thiel CM(2).

Author information:
(1)Biological Psychology, Department of Psychology, School of Medicine and 
Health Sciences, Carl von Ossietzky Universität Oldenburg, Oldenburg, Germany.
(2)Biological Psychology, Department of Psychology, School of Medicine and 
Health Sciences, Carl von Ossietzky Universität Oldenburg, Oldenburg, Germany; 
Cluster of Excellence "Hearing4all", Carl von Ossietzky Universität Oldenburg, 
Oldenburg, Germany; Research Center Neurosensory Science, Carl von Ossietzky 
Universität Oldenburg, Oldenburg, Germany. Electronic address: 
christiane.thiel@uni-oldenburg.de.

Nicotine improves sustained attention and reduces distractor interference, 
promoting cognitive stability. While stable performance may be beneficial in 
some situations, others require flexible updating of task demands. 
Frontoparietal networks, basal ganglia and thalamus contribute to an optimal 
balance of stable and flexible performance. We aimed to test how the cholinergic 
agonist nicotine modulates this balance and used an ongoing visual task 
including switch and distractor trials to gauge cognitive flexibility and 
stability respectively. Young healthy non-smokers (n = 39) received either a 
7 mg transdermal nicotine or placebo patch in a double-blind, within-subject 
design one hour prior to performing the task in a 3 T MR scanner. Nicotine 
enhanced response times in all task conditions but did not significantly impact 
distractor or switch costs. Neurally, there was no significant nicotine induced 
modulation of distractor- or switch-related activity on group level. However, a 
brain-behaviour correlation analysis revealed that the nicotine-induced 
alterations of distractor costs correlated positively with distractor-related 
neural activity in the right intraparietal sulcus and the right pulvinar nucleus 
of the thalamus. We suggest that a nicotinic contribution to balancing stability 
and flexibility is weak in young healthy non-smokers. The brain-behaviour 
correlations imply that if nicotine reduces distractor interference, the 
modulation is found in thalamic-parietal networks.

Copyright © 2020 IBRO. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2020.07.029
PMID: 32717295 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Neuropsychologia. 2008 Oct;46(12):2924-35. doi: 
10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2008.06.006. Epub 2008 Jun 14.

Shifting set about task switching: behavioral and neural evidence for distinct 
forms of cognitive flexibility.

Ravizza SM(1), Carter CS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI 48824, 
United States. ravizzas@msu.edu

Task switching is an important aspect of cognitive control and understanding its 
underlying mechanisms is the focus of considerable research. In this paper, we 
contrast two different kinds of task switching paradigms and provide evidence 
that different cognitive mechanisms underlie switching behavior depending on 
whether the switch is between sets of rules (rule switch) or sets of features 
presented simultaneously (perceptual switch). In two experiments, we demonstrate 
that behavioral effects (Experiment 1) and neural recruitment (Experiment 2) 
vary with the type of switch performed. While perceptual switch costs occurred 
when the alternative feature set was physically present, rule switch costs were 
observed even in their absence. Rule switching was also characterized by larger 
target repetition effects and by greater engagement of the dorsolateral 
prefrontal cortex. In contrast, perceptual switching was associated with greater 
recruitment of the parietal cortex. These results provide strong evidence for 
multiple forms of switching and suggest the limitations of generalizing results 
across shift types.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2008.06.006
PMCID: PMC2553424
PMID: 18601941 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Neuropsychopharmacology. 2018 Jan;43(2):294-301. doi: 10.1038/npp.2017.189. Epub 
2017 Sep 27.

Oxytocin Modulates Attention Switching Between Interoceptive Signals and 
External Social Cues.

Yao S(1), Becker B(1), Zhao W(1), Zhao Z(1), Kou J(1), Ma X(1), Geng Y(1), Ren 
P(1), Kendrick KM(1).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory for NeuroInformation, School of Life Science and Technology, 
Center for Information in Medicine, University of Electronic Science and 
Technology of China, Chengdu, China.

Emotional experience involves an integrated interplay between processing of 
external emotional cues and interoceptive feedback, and this is impaired in a 
number of emotional disorders. The neuropeptide oxytocin (OT) enhances the 
salience of external social cues but its influence on interoception is unknown. 
The present pharmaco-fMRI study therefore investigated whether OT enhances 
interoceptive awareness and if it influences the interplay between interoceptive 
and salience processing. In a randomized, double-blind, between-subject, design 
study 83 subjects received either intranasal OT or placebo. In Experiment 1, 
subjects performed a heartbeat detection task alone, while in Experiment 2 they 
did so while viewing both neutral and emotional face stimuli. Interoceptive 
accuracy and neural responses in interoceptive and salience networks were 
measured. In Experiment 1, OT had no significant influence on interoceptive 
accuracy or associated activity in the right anterior insula (AI) and dorsal 
anterior cingulate cortex. However, in Experiment 2 when face stimuli were also 
presented, OT decreased interoceptive accuracy and increased right AI activation 
and its functional connectivity with the left posterior insula (PI), with the 
latter both being negatively correlated with accuracy scores. The present study 
provides the first evidence that while OT does not influence processing of 
interoceptive cues per se it may switch attention away from them towards 
external salient social cues by enhancing right AI responses and its control 
over the PI. Thus OT may help regulate the interplay between interoceptive and 
external salience processing within the insula and could be of potential 
therapeutic benefit for emotional disorders.

DOI: 10.1038/npp.2017.189
PMCID: PMC5729568
PMID: 28836577 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


30. J Psychiatr Res. 2023 Aug;164:322-328. doi: 10.1016/j.jpsychires.2023.06.035. 
Epub 2023 Jun 26.

Neural correlates of perceptual switching and their association with empathy and 
alexithymia in individuals with and without autism spectrum disorder.

Tei S(1), Itahashi T(2), Aoki YY(2), Kubota M(3), Hashimoto RI(4), Nakamura 
M(5), Okuzumi S(6), Takahashi H(7), Ohta H(8), Fujino J(9).

Author information:
(1)Medical Institute of Developmental Disabilities Research, Showa University, 
6-11-11 Kita-karasuyama, Setagaya-ku, Tokyo, Japan; Department of Psychiatry, 
Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto University, 54 Shogoin-Kawaracho, Sakyo-ku, 
Kyoto, Japan; Institute of Applied Brain Sciences, Waseda University, 2-579-15 
Mikajima, Tokorozawa, Saitama, Japan; School of Human and Social Sciences, Tokyo 
International University, 2509 Matoba, Kawagoe, Saitama, Japan. Electronic 
address: chengctky@gmail.com.
(2)Medical Institute of Developmental Disabilities Research, Showa University, 
6-11-11 Kita-karasuyama, Setagaya-ku, Tokyo, Japan.
(3)Medical Institute of Developmental Disabilities Research, Showa University, 
6-11-11 Kita-karasuyama, Setagaya-ku, Tokyo, Japan; Department of Psychiatry, 
Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto University, 54 Shogoin-Kawaracho, Sakyo-ku, 
Kyoto, Japan; Department of Functional Brain Imaging, National Institute of 
Radiological Sciences, National Institutes for Quantum Science and Technology, 
4-9-1 Anagawa, Inage-ku, Chiba, 263-8555, Japan.
(4)Medical Institute of Developmental Disabilities Research, Showa University, 
6-11-11 Kita-karasuyama, Setagaya-ku, Tokyo, Japan; Department of Language 
Sciences, Graduate School of Humanities, Tokyo Metropolitan University, 1-1 
Minami-Osawa, Hachioji-shi, Tokyo, Japan.
(5)Medical Institute of Developmental Disabilities Research, Showa University, 
6-11-11 Kita-karasuyama, Setagaya-ku, Tokyo, Japan; Kanagawa Psychiatric Center, 
2-5-1 Serigaya, Yokohama, Kanagawa, Japan.
(6)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Graduate School of Medical 
and Dental Sciences, Tokyo Medical and Dental University, 1-5-45 Yushima, 
Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, Japan.
(7)Medical Institute of Developmental Disabilities Research, Showa University, 
6-11-11 Kita-karasuyama, Setagaya-ku, Tokyo, Japan; Department of Psychiatry, 
Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto University, 54 Shogoin-Kawaracho, Sakyo-ku, 
Kyoto, Japan; Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Graduate School 
of Medical and Dental Sciences, Tokyo Medical and Dental University, 1-5-45 
Yushima, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, Japan; Center for Brain Integration Research, Tokyo 
Medical and Dental University, 1-5-45 Yushima, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, Japan.
(8)Medical Institute of Developmental Disabilities Research, Showa University, 
6-11-11 Kita-karasuyama, Setagaya-ku, Tokyo, Japan; Department of Psychiatry, 
School of Medicine, Showa University, 6-11-11 Kita-karasuyama, Setagaya-ku, 
Tokyo, Japan.
(9)Medical Institute of Developmental Disabilities Research, Showa University, 
6-11-11 Kita-karasuyama, Setagaya-ku, Tokyo, Japan; Department of Psychiatry, 
Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto University, 54 Shogoin-Kawaracho, Sakyo-ku, 
Kyoto, Japan; Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Graduate School 
of Medical and Dental Sciences, Tokyo Medical and Dental University, 1-5-45 
Yushima, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, Japan. Electronic address: jf15psyc@tmd.ac.jp.

Individuals with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) often show limited empathy (poor 
recognition of others' emotions) and high alexithymia (poor recognition of own 
emotions and external thinking), which can negatively impact their social 
functioning. Previous experimental studies suggest that alterations in cognitive 
flexibility play key roles in the development of these characteristics in ASD. 
However, the underlying neural mechanisms that link cognitive flexibility and 
empathy/alexithymia are still largely unknown. In this study, we examined the 
neural correlates of cognitive flexibility via functional magnetic resonance 
imaging during perceptual task-switching in typical development (TD) adults and 
adults with ASD. We also investigated associations between regional neural 
activity and psychometric empathy and alexithymia scores among these 
populations. In the TD group, stronger activation of the left middle frontal 
gyrus was associated with better perceptual switching and greater empathic 
concern. Among individuals with ASD, stronger activation of the left inferior 
frontal gyrus was associated with better perceptual switching, greater empathy, 
and lower alexithymia. These findings will contribute to develop a better 
understanding of social cognition, and could be informative for the development 
of new ASD therapies.

Copyright © 2023 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jpsychires.2023.06.035
PMID: 37393797 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest None.


31. Hum Brain Mapp. 2021 Oct 1;42(14):4555-4567. doi: 10.1002/hbm.25564. Epub 2021 
Jun 26.

Effective connectivity underlying reward-based executive control.

Hippmann B(1), Tzvi E(2), Göttlich M(1), Weiblen R(1), Münte TF(1), Jessen S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Lübeck, Lübeck, Germany.
(2)Department of Neurology, University of Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany.

Motivational influences on cognitive control play an important role in shaping 
human behavior. Cognitive facilitation through motivators such as prospective 
reward or punishment is thought to depend on regions from the dopaminergic 
mesocortical network, primarily the ventral tegmental area (VTA), inferior 
frontal junction (IFJ), and anterior cingulate cortex (ACC). However, how 
interactions between these regions relate to motivated control remains elusive. 
In the present functional magnetic resonance imaging study, we used dynamic 
causal modeling (DCM) to investigate effective connectivity between left IFJ, 
ACC, and VTA in a task-switching paradigm comprising three distinct motivational 
conditions (prospective monetary reward or punishment and a control condition). 
We found that while prospective punishment significantly facilitated switching 
between tasks on a behavioral level, interactions between IFJ, ACC, and VTA were 
characterized by modulations through prospective reward but not punishment. Our 
DCM results show that IFJ and VTA modulate ACC activity in parallel rather than 
by interaction to serve task demands in reward-based cognitive control. Our 
findings further demonstrate that prospective reward and punishment 
differentially affect neural control mechanisms to initiate decision-making.

© 2021 The Authors. Human Brain Mapping published by Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/hbm.25564
PMCID: PMC8410574
PMID: 34173997 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.


32. Neuropsychologia. 2022 Jul 29;172:108273. doi: 
10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2022.108273. Epub 2022 May 21.

Partially shared neural mechanisms of language control and executive control in 
bilinguals: Meta-analytic comparisons of language and task switching studies.

Jiao L(1), Meng N(1), Wang Z(2), Schwieter JW(3), Liu C(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Normal College & School of Teacher Education, 
Qingdao University, Qingdao, China.
(2)Guangzhou Xinhua University, Dongguan, Guangdong Province, China.
(3)Language Acquisition, Multilingualism, & Cognition Lab, Bilingualism Matters 
@ Wilfrid Laurier University, Canada.
(4)Department of Psychology, Normal College & School of Teacher Education, 
Qingdao University, Qingdao, China. Electronic address: congu902@gmail.com.

The extent to which bilingual language control (BLC) is related to 
domain-general executive control (EC) remains unclear. The present study applied 
activation likelihood estimation (ALE) meta-analyses to identify commonalities 
and distinctions in the brain regions across domains reported in neuroimaging 
studies. We specifically compare results from two experimental tasks: language 
switching, a typical measure of BLC, and task switching, an experiment that 
measures EC. Conjunction analyses showed a domain-general pattern between 
language switching and task switching, with convergent activity in the left 
dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC), pre-SMA/dACC complex (pre-supplementary 
motor area/dorsal anterior cingulate cortex), and left precuneus. Regarding 
domain-specificity, contrast analyses revealed stronger convergence of 
activation in the left fusiform gyrus and occipital gyrus in language switching 
compared to task switching, and conversely, stronger convergence of activation 
in the left DLPFC in task switching. Overall, these findings illustrate the 
partially overlapping nature of the neural circuits involved in BLC and EC.

Copyright © 2022 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2022.108273
PMID: 35605683 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Brain Struct Funct. 2023 May;228(3-4):997-1017. doi: 10.1007/s00429-023-02641-y. 
Epub 2023 Apr 24.

Accurate localization and coactivation profiles of the frontal eye field and 
inferior frontal junction: an ALE and MACM fMRI meta-analysis.

Bedini M(1)(2), Olivetti E(3)(4), Avesani P(3)(4), Baldauf D(3).

Author information:
(1)Center for Mind/Brain Sciences (CIMeC), University of Trento, Via delle 
Regole 101, 38123, Trento, Italy. marco.bedini@unitn.it.
(2)Department of Psychology, University of California, San Diego, McGill Hall 
9500 Gilman Dr, La Jolla, CA, 92093-0109, USA. marco.bedini@unitn.it.
(3)Center for Mind/Brain Sciences (CIMeC), University of Trento, Via delle 
Regole 101, 38123, Trento, Italy.
(4)NILab, Bruno Kessler Foundation (FBK), Via delle Regole 101, 38123, Trento, 
Italy.

The frontal eye field (FEF) and the inferior frontal junction (IFJ) are 
prefrontal structures involved in mediating multiple aspects of goal-driven 
behavior. Despite being recognized as prominent nodes of the networks underlying 
spatial attention and oculomotor control, and working memory and cognitive 
control, respectively, the limited quantitative evidence on their precise 
localization has considerably impeded the detailed understanding of their 
structure and connectivity. In this study, we performed an activation likelihood 
estimation (ALE) fMRI meta-analysis by selecting studies that employed standard 
paradigms to accurately infer the localization of these regions in stereotaxic 
space. For the FEF, we found the highest spatial convergence of activations for 
prosaccade and antisaccade paradigms at the junction of the precentral sulcus 
and superior frontal sulcus. For the IFJ, we found consistent activations across 
oddball/attention, working memory, task-switching and Stroop paradigms at the 
junction of the inferior precentral sulcus and inferior frontal sulcus. We 
related these clusters to previous meta-analyses, sulcal/gyral neuroanatomy, and 
a comprehensive brain parcellation, highlighting important differences compared 
to their results and taxonomy. Finally, we leveraged the ALE peak coordinates as 
seeds to perform a meta-analytic connectivity modeling (MACM) analysis, which 
revealed systematic coactivation patterns spanning the frontal, parietal, and 
temporal cortices. We decoded the behavioral domains associated with these 
coactivations, suggesting that these may allow FEF and IFJ to support their 
specialized roles in flexible behavior. Our study provides the meta-analytic 
groundwork for investigating the relationship between functional specialization 
and connectivity of two crucial control structures of the prefrontal cortex.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s00429-023-02641-y
PMCID: PMC10147761
PMID: 37093304 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no relevant financial or 
non-financial interests to disclose.


34. Behav Brain Funct. 2025 Nov 16;21(1):40. doi: 10.1186/s12993-025-00301-1.

Aging-related changes in cognitive flexibility: fMRI meta-analysis.

Chuikova Z(1)(2), Faber A(3), Filatov A(4), Myachykov A(5)(6), Shtyrov Y(7), 
Arsalidou M(8)(9).

Author information:
(1)Cognitive Health and Intelligence Centre, Institute for Cognitive 
Neuroscience, HSE University, Moscow, Russian Federation. zhanna7496@mail.ru.
(2)Department of Pedagogy and Medical Psychology, Sechenov University, Moscow, 
Russian Federation. zhanna7496@mail.ru.
(3)Laboratory for Cognitive Research, School of Psychology, Faculty of Social 
Sciences, HSE University, Moscow, Russian Federation.
(4)Institute for Oriental and Classical Studies, HSE University, Moscow, Russian 
Federation.
(5)Cognitive Health and Intelligence Centre, Institute for Cognitive 
Neuroscience, HSE University, Moscow, Russian Federation.
(6)Centre for Cognitive and Brain Sciences, University of Macau, Taipa, Macau 
SAR, China.
(7)Center of Functionally Integrative Neuroscience, Aarhus University, Aarhus, 
Denmark.
(8)York University, Toronto, Canada. marie.arsalidou@gmail.com.
(9)NeuroPsyLab.Com, Toronto, Canada. marie.arsalidou@gmail.com.

Cognitive flexibility-the ability to adaptively shift between different mental 
processes-is essential for human functioning. This meta-analysis examines 
age-related changes in neural correlates of cognitive flexibility using two 
common assessments: the Wisconsin Card Sorting Test (rule-discovery) and 
Task-Switching Paradigm (rule-retrieval). We synthesized findings from 85 
articles comprising 118 experiments with 2246 participants across young, 
middle-age, and older adult groups. Activation Likelihood Estimation analyses 
revealed an age-related decrease in neural involvement, particularly in 
posterior regions, with an anterior shift in older adults. Younger adults 
exhibited bilateral activation patterns while older adults showed left-dominant 
activity, indicating neural circuit redistribution. Rule-retrieval tasks 
consistently engaged left-lateralized frontoparietal regions across all age 
groups, with middle-age adults additionally recruiting the right cerebellum and 
medial frontal gyrus. For rule-discovery tasks, age-related changes were 
observed in bilateral frontoparietal regions, with older adults showing unique 
activation in the left inferior frontal gyrus. These findings highlight 
differential aging trajectories for rule-retrieval versus rule-discovery 
processes, reflecting changes in neural mechanisms with aging. Furthermore, 
middle-age adults recruited additional regions related to conflict monitoring, 
whereas older adults relied more on planning-related areas, suggesting strategy 
differences. Our study provides critical insights into the neural underpinnings 
of cognitive flexibility and its age-related changes, emphasizing the need for 
research on mechanisms and task-specific age trajectories.

© 2025. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12993-025-00301-1
PMCID: PMC12621379
PMID: 41243112 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Ethics approval and consent to 
participate: Not applicable. Consent for publication: Not applicable. Competing 
interests: The authors declare no competing interests.


35. Neurosci Biobehav Rev. 2014 Nov;47:614-35. doi: 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2014.10.003.

Understanding bimanual coordination across small time scales from an 
electrophysiological perspective.

Rueda-Delgado LM, Solesio-Jofre E, Serrien DJ, Mantini D, Daffertshofer A, 
Swinnen SP.

Bimanual movement involves a variety of coordinated functions, ranging from 
elementary patterns that are performed automatically to complex patterns that 
require practice to be performed skillfully. The neural dynamics accompanying 
these coordination patterns are complex and rapid. By means of electro- and 
magneto-encephalographic approaches, it has been possible to examine these 
dynamics during bimanual coordination with excellent temporal resolution, which 
complements other neuroimaging modalities with superb spatial resolution. This 
review focuses on EEG/MEG studies that unravel the processes involved in 
movement planning and execution, motor learning, and executive functions 
involved in task switching and dual tasking. Evidence is presented for a 
spatio-temporal reorganization of the neural networks within and between 
hemispheres to meet increased task difficulty demands, induced or spontaneous 
switches in coordination mode, or training-induced neuroplastic modulation in 
coordination dynamics. Future theoretical developments will benefit from the 
integration of research techniques unraveling neural activity at different time 
scales. Ultimately this work will contribute to a better understanding of how 
the human brain orchestrates complex behavior via the implementation of inter- 
and intra-hemispheric coordination networks.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2014.10.003
PMID: 25445184 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Neuropsychologia. 2014 Sep;62:331-40. doi: 
10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2014.04.015. Epub 2014 Apr 30.

Dissociating strategy-dependent and independent components in task preparation.

De Baene W(1), Brass M(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental Psychology, Ghent University, Henri Dunantlaan 2, 
Ghent B-9000, Belgium. Electronic address: Wouter.DeBaene@ugent.be.
(2)Department of Experimental Psychology, Ghent University, Henri Dunantlaan 2, 
Ghent B-9000, Belgium.

A central aspect of cognitive control is the capacity to anticipatorily prepare 
for specific task requirements prior to carrying out a task. To study the 
changes caused by task preparation, the cued task-switching paradigm has 
generally been used. While research on anticipatory control has long focused on 
general processing differences between switch and repeat trials, more recent 
research suggests that contextual variations strongly modulate such differences. 
In the current paper, we argue that anticipatory task set preparation strongly 
depends on contextual variables leading to different strategies to prepare for 
an upcoming task. We provide behavioral as well as neuroscientific evidence for 
this claim. Furthermore, we show that some preparatory processes are sensitive 
to strategic modulations whereas other preparatory processes are not. Based on 
this, we propose a functional dissociation within the fronto-parietal network 
involved in task preparation.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2014.04.015
PMID: 24791708 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Addict Biol. 2014 Nov;19(6):1041-54. doi: 10.1111/adb.12175. Epub 2014 Aug 6.

Impaired fear recognition and attentional set-shifting is associated with brain 
structural changes in alcoholic patients.

Trick L(1), Kempton MJ, Williams SC, Duka T.

Author information:
(1)School of Psychology, University of Sussex, UK.

Alcoholic patients with multiple detoxifications/relapses show cognitive and 
emotional deficits. We performed structural magnetic resonance imaging and 
examined performance on a cognitive flexibility task (intra-extradimensional set 
shift and reversal; IED). We also presented subjects with fearful, disgust and 
anger facial emotional expressions. Participants were abstaining, multiply 
detoxified (MDTx; n = 12) or singly detoxified patients (SDTx; n = 17) and 
social drinker controls (n = 31). Alcoholic patients were less able than 
controls to change their behavior in accordance with the changing of the rules 
in the IED and they were less accurate in recognizing fearful expressions in 
particular. They also showed lower gray matter volume compared with controls in 
frontal brain areas, including inferior frontal cortex (IFC) and insula that 
mediate emotional processing, inferior parietal lobule and medial frontal cortex 
that mediate attentional and motor planning processes, respectively. Impairments 
in performance and some of the regional decreases in gray matter were greater in 
MDTx. Gray matter volume in IFC in patients was negatively correlated with the 
number of detoxifications, whereas inferior parietal lobule was negatively 
correlated with the control over drinking score (impaired control over drinking 
questionnaire). Performance in IED was also negatively correlated with gray 
matter volume in IFC/BA47, whereas recognition of fearful faces was positively 
correlated with the IFC gray matter. Repeated episodes of detoxification from 
alcohol, related to severity of dependency, are coupled with altered brain 
structure in areas of emotional regulation, attention and motor planning. Such 
changes may confer increased inability to switch behavior according to 
environmental demands and social incompetence, contributing to relapse.

© 2014 The Authors. Addiction Biology published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on 
behalf of Society for the Study of Addiction.

DOI: 10.1111/adb.12175
PMCID: PMC4282104
PMID: 25123156 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Biol Psychol. 2024 Jan;185:108726. doi: 10.1016/j.biopsycho.2023.108726. Epub 
2023 Nov 29.

Left superior parietal lobe mediates the link between spontaneous mind-wandering 
tendency and task-switching performance.

Wong YS(1), Yu J(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology and Brain Health Research Centre, University of 
Otago, Dunedin, New Zealand; Science of Learning in Education Centre, Office of 
Education Research, National Institute of Education, Nanyang Technological 
University, Singapore. Electronic address: yishengwong.ysw@gmail.com.
(2)Psychology, School of Social Sciences, Nanyang Technological University, 
Singapore.

While increasing studies have documented the link between mind wandering and 
task switching, less is known about which brain regions mediate this 
relationship. Using the MPI-Leipzig Mind-Brain-Body dataset (N = 173), we 
investigated the association between trait-level tendencies of mind wandering, 
task-switching performance, structural connectivity, and resting-state 
functional connectivity. At the behavioral level, we found that higher 
spontaneous mind-wandering trait scores were associated with shorter reaction 
times on both repeat and switch trials. The whole brain cortical thickness 
analysis revealed a strong mediating role of the left superior parietal lobe, 
which is part of the dorsal attention network, in the link between spontaneous 
mind-wandering tendency and task-switching performance. The resting-state 
functional connectivity analysis further demonstrated that this association was 
partly mediated by the negative dorsal attention network-default mode network 
functional connectivity. No significant mediating effects were found for 
deliberate mind-wandering tendency. Overall, the findings highlight the pivotal 
role of the left superior parietal lobe in activating new mental set during 
mind-wandering and task-switching processes, providing another evidence in favor 
of a role for switching in mind wandering.

Copyright © 2023 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.biopsycho.2023.108726
PMID: 38036262 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper. We have no known conflict of interest to disclose.


39. Hum Brain Mapp. 2007 Oct;28(10):1033-44. doi: 10.1002/hbm.20326.

Real-time fMRI using brain-state classification.

LaConte SM(1), Peltier SJ, Hu XP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology, Emory 
University, Atlanta, GA 30322, USA. slaconte@bme.emory.edu

We have implemented a real-time functional magnetic resonance imaging system 
based on multivariate classification. This approach is distinctly different from 
spatially localized real-time implementations, since it does not require prior 
assumptions about functional localization and individual performance strategies, 
and has the ability to provide feedback based on intuitive translations of brain 
state rather than localized fluctuations. Thus this approach provides the 
capability for a new class of experimental designs in which real-time feedback 
control of the stimulus is possible-rather than using a fixed paradigm, 
experiments can adaptively evolve as subjects receive brain-state feedback. In 
this report, we describe our implementation and characterize its performance 
capabilities. We observed approximately 80% classification accuracy using whole 
brain, block-design, motor data. Within both left and right motor task 
conditions, important differences exist between the initial transient period 
produced by task switching (changing between rapid left or right index finger 
button presses) and the subsequent stable period during sustained activity. 
Further analysis revealed that very high accuracy is achievable during stable 
task periods, and that the responsiveness of the classifier to changes in task 
condition can be much faster than signal time-to-peak rates. Finally, we 
demonstrate the versatility of this implementation with respect to behavioral 
task, suggesting that our results are applicable across a spectrum of cognitive 
domains. Beyond basic research, this technology can complement 
electroencephalography-based brain computer interface research, and has 
potential applications in the areas of biofeedback rehabilitation, lie 
detection, learning studies, virtual reality-based training, and enhanced 
conscious awareness.

Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/hbm.20326
PMCID: PMC6871430
PMID: 17133383 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


40. J Cogn Neurosci. 2020 May;32(5):989-1008. doi: 10.1162/jocn_a_01541. Epub 2020 
Feb 4.

Neural Mechanisms of Strategic Adaptation in Attentional Flexibility.

Sali AW(1)(2), Jiang J(3), Egner T(2).

Author information:
(1)Wake Forest University, Winston-Salem, NC.
(2)Duke University, Durham, NC.
(3)University of Iowa.

Erratum in
    J Cogn Neurosci. 2020 Jun;32(6):1211. doi: 10.1162/jocn_x_01576.

Individuals are able to adjust their readiness to shift spatial attention, 
referred to as "attentional flexibility," according to the changing demands of 
the environment, but the neural mechanisms underlying learned adjustments in 
flexibility are unknown. In the current study, we used fMRI to identify the 
brain structures responsible for learning shift likelihood. Participants were 
cued to covertly hold or shift attention among continuous streams of 
alphanumeric characters and to indicate the parity of target stimuli. Unbeknown 
to the participants, the stream locations were predictive of the likelihood of 
having to shift (or hold) attention. Participants adapted their attentional 
flexibility according to contextual demands, such that the RT cost associated 
with shifting attention was smallest when shift cues were most likely. Learning 
model-derived shift prediction error scaled positively with activity within 
dorsal and ventral frontoparietal regions, documenting that these regions track 
and update shift likelihood. A complementary inverted encoding model analysis 
revealed that the pretrial difference in attentional selection strength between 
to-be-attended and to-be-ignored locations did not change with increasing shift 
likelihood. The behavioral improvement associated with learned flexibility may 
primarily arise from a speeding of the shift process rather than from 
preparatory broadening of attentional selection.

DOI: 10.1162/jocn_a_01541
PMCID: PMC7394318
PMID: 32013688 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Neuroimage. 2016 Jan 15;125:578-586. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2015.10.067. Epub 
2015 Oct 28.

Neural signals encoding shifts in beliefs.

Schwartenbeck P(1), FitzGerald THB(2), Dolan R(2).

Author information:
(1)The Wellcome Trust Centre for Neuroimaging, UCL, 12 Queen Square, London WC1N 
3BG, UK; Centre for Cognitive Neuroscience, University of Salzburg, Salzburg 
5020, Austria; Neuroscience Institute, Christian-Doppler-Klinik, Paracelsus 
Medical University Salzburg, Salzburg 5020, Austria; Max Planck University 
College London Centre for Computational Psychiatry and Ageing Research, London 
WC1B 5EH, UK. Electronic address: philipp.schwartenbeck.@stud.sbg.ac.at.
(2)The Wellcome Trust Centre for Neuroimaging, UCL, 12 Queen Square, London WC1N 
3BG, UK; Max Planck University College London Centre for Computational 
Psychiatry and Ageing Research, London WC1B 5EH, UK.

Dopamine is implicated in a diverse range of cognitive functions including 
cognitive flexibility, task switching, signalling novel or unexpected stimuli as 
well as advance information. There is also longstanding line of thought that 
links dopamine with belief formation and, crucially, aberrant belief formation 
in psychosis. Integrating these strands of evidence would suggest that dopamine 
plays a central role in belief updating and more specifically in encoding of 
meaningful information content in observations. The precise nature of this 
relationship has remained unclear. To directly address this question we 
developed a paradigm that allowed us to decompose two distinct types of 
information content, information-theoretic surprise that reflects the 
unexpectedness of an observation, and epistemic value that induces shifts in 
beliefs or, more formally, Bayesian surprise. Using functional 
magnetic-resonance imaging in humans we show that dopamine-rich midbrain regions 
encode shifts in beliefs whereas surprise is encoded in prefrontal regions, 
including the pre-supplementary motor area and dorsal cingulate cortex. By 
linking putative dopaminergic activity to belief updating these data provide a 
link to false belief formation that characterises hyperdopaminergic states 
associated with idiopathic and drug induced psychosis.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2015.10.067
PMCID: PMC4692512
PMID: 26520774 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


42. J Clin Exp Neuropsychol. 2018 Aug;40(6):606-618. doi: 
10.1080/13803395.2017.1401597. Epub 2017 Nov 23.

Vulnerabilities in sequencing and task switching in healthy youth offspring of 
parents with mood disorders.

Singh MK(1), Leslie SM(1), Bhattacharjee K(1), Gross M(1), Weisman EF(1), Soudi 
LM(1), Phillips OR(1), Onopa A(1).

Author information:
(1)a Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences , Stanford University 
School of Medicine , Stanford , CA , USA.

INTRODUCTION: Visuospatial processing and task switching are impaired in 
individuals with mood disorders. It is unknown whether early deficits are 
present before mood symptom on set or are related to risk for a specific type of 
mood disorder. To investigate, we compared visual attention and task switching 
during sequencing among never-disordered youth with parental family histories of 
bipolar (BD) and major depressive disorders (MDD) and healthy controls (HC) with 
no personal or family history of psychopathology.
METHOD: 8-17-year-old youth of parents with BD (n = 31, "BD-risk"), youth of 
parents with MDD (n = 49, "MDD-risk"), and demographically similar HC (n = 31, 
"HC") were examined using the Delis-Kaplan Executive Functioning System Trail 
Making Test. Seed-based resting-state functional connectivity (RSFC) was 
collected from a subset of 88 participants (25 BD-risk, 37 MDD-risk, 26 HC) to 
investigate group differences in RSFC related to visuospatial processing.
RESULTS: BD-risk and MDD-risk offspring had impaired sequencing and task 
switching, demonstrated by reduced scores on visual scanning, F(2, 108) = 4.12, 
p = .02, number sequencing, F(2, 88) = 4.75, p = .01, letter sequencing, F(2, 
108) = 4.24, p = .02, and number-letter sequencing, F(2, 108) = 4.66, p = .01, 
compared to scores in HC. RSFC between the posterior cingulate (PCC) and 
clusters in the subcallosal cortex, amygdala, and hippocampus significantly 
differed among HC, BD-risk, and MDD-risk groups. PCC-subcallosal/limbic RSFC was 
positively coupled in the MDD-risk and BD-risk groups and negatively coupled in 
HCs.
CONCLUSIONS: Youth at familial risk for mood disorders demonstrate visuospatial 
deficits early in the processing stream. Improved methods for identifying 
at-risk children with the earliest possible neurocognitive impairments may 
inform remediation strategies that could prevent mood disorders.

DOI: 10.1080/13803395.2017.1401597
PMCID: PMC6167013
PMID: 29168420 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICTS OF INTEREST Dr. Singh receives 
research support from Stanford’s Child Health Research Institute, National 
Institute of Mental Health, Office of Research on Women’s Health, National 
Institute of Aging, Neuronetics, Johnson and Johnson, and the Brain and Behavior 
Foundation. She has been on the advisory board for Sunovion. No other authors 
report any conflicts of interest.


43. Cereb Cortex. 2023 Sep 9;33(18):10155-10180. doi: 10.1093/cercor/bhad273.

Brain functional characterization of response-code conflict in dual-tasking and 
its modulation by age.

Paas Oliveros LK(1)(2), Cieslik EC(1)(2), Pieczykolan A(3), Pläschke RN(2), 
Eickhoff SB(1)(2), Langner R(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Neuroscience and Medicine (INM-7: Brain and Behaviour), 
Forschungszentrum Jülich, Jülich 52425, Germany.
(2)Institute of Systems Neuroscience, Medical Faculty, Heinrich Heine University 
Düsseldorf, Düsseldorf 40225, Germany.
(3)Rheinische Fachhochschule - University of Applied Sciences, Cologne 50923, 
Germany.

Crosstalk between conflicting response codes contributes to interference in 
dual-tasking, an effect exacerbated in advanced age. Here, we investigated (i) 
brain activity correlates of such response-code conflicts, (ii) activity 
modulations by individual dual-task performance and related cognitive abilities, 
(iii) task-modulated connectivity within the task network, and (iv) age-related 
differences in all these aspects. Young and older adults underwent fMRI while 
responding to the pitch of tones through spatially mapped speeded button presses 
with one or two hands concurrently. Using opposing stimulus-response mappings 
between hands, we induced conflict between simultaneously activated response 
codes. These response-code conflicts elicited activation in key regions of the 
multiple-demand network. While thalamic and parietal areas of the 
conflict-related network were modulated by attentional, working-memory and 
task-switching abilities, efficient conflict resolution in dual-tasking mainly 
relied on increasing supplementary motor activity. Older adults showed 
non-compensatory hyperactivity in left superior frontal gyrus, and higher right 
premotor activity was modulated by working-memory capacity. Finally, 
connectivity between premotor or parietal seed regions and the 
conflict-sensitive network was neither conflict-specific nor age-sensitive. 
Overall, resolving dual-task response-code conflict recruited substantial parts 
of the multiple-demand network, whose activity and coupling, however, were only 
little affected by individual differences in task performance or age.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. 
For permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/cercor/bhad273
PMCID: PMC10502578
PMID: 37540164 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Neuroimage. 2002 Sep;17(1):95-109. doi: 10.1006/nimg.2002.1169.

The roles of timing and task order during task switching.

Dreher JC(1), Koechlin E, Ali SO, Grafman J.

Author information:
(1)Cognitive Neuroscience Section, National Institute of Neurological Disorder 
and Stroke, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

The neural bases of the different processes involved in task switching remain 
poorly identified. Whether distinct brain regions are involved according to the 
overall structure of the task sequence and the predictability of task timing 
during task switching is unknown. To address this question, we used functional 
magnetic resonance imaging and a 2 x 2 factorial design varying timing 
(fixed/random) and task order (predictable/unpredictable). We hypothesized that 
predictable task order should activate brain regions involved in long-term 
memory retrieval because retrieving which task has to be performed constitutes 
the essential part of what subjects can do to prepare before stimulus 
presentation. When examining the "pure" main effects of task order/timing 
predictability/ unpredictability, we found that anticipating task order 
activated the right hippocampus, the anterior medial prefrontal cortex, and the 
posterior cingulate cortex, while anticipating task onset timing activated the 
left middle and superior frontal gyrus. Furthermore, task order unpredictability 
activated the intraparietal cortex bilaterally while random relative to fixed 
timing activated the right cerebellum. Interactions between task order and 
timing were found in a network, which included the left frontopolar cortex and 
the lateral prefrontal cortex bilaterally. Specifically, the left frontopolar 
cortex was more activated when both timing and task order were predictable, 
while the lateral prefrontal cortices were more activated when both task order 
and timing were unpredictable. These results indicate a hierarchic organization 
of the prefrontal cortex along a posterioanterior axis as the task becomes more 
endogenously guided. Finally, we found no evidence for specific brain regions 
involved in task switching because a bilateral prefronto-parietal network, which 
was activated in task switching relative to performing each task separately, was 
no longer activated relative to a control condition, which required subjects to 
maintain two tasks in memory without switching between them.

DOI: 10.1006/nimg.2002.1169
PMID: 12482070 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


45. PLoS One. 2015 May 22;10(5):e0127203. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0127203. 
eCollection 2015.

Neural Correlates of Attentional Flexibility during Approach and Avoidance 
Motivation.

Calcott RD(1), Berkman ET(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Oregon, Eugene, OR, United States of 
America.

Dynamic, momentary approach or avoidance motivational states have downstream 
effects on eventual goal success and overall well being, but there is still 
uncertainty about how those states affect the proximal neurocognitive processes 
(e.g., attention) that mediate the longer-term effects. Attentional flexibility, 
or the ability to switch between different attentional foci, is one such 
neurocognitive process that influences outcomes in the long run. The present 
study examined how approach and avoidance motivational states affect the neural 
processes involved in attentional flexibility using fMRI with the aim of 
determining whether flexibility operates via different neural mechanisms under 
these different states. Attentional flexibility was operationalized as subjects' 
ability to switch between global and local stimulus features. In addition to 
subjects' motivational state, the task context was manipulated by varying the 
ratio of global to local trials in a block in light of recent findings about the 
moderating role of context on motivation-related differences in attentional 
flexibility. The neural processes involved in attentional flexibility differ 
under approach versus avoidance states. First, differences in the preparatory 
activity in key brain regions suggested that subjects' preparedness to switch 
was influenced by motivational state (anterior insula) and the interaction 
between motivation and context (superior temporal gyrus, inferior parietal 
lobule). Additionally, we observed motivation-related differences the anterior 
cingulate cortex during switching. These results provide initial evidence that 
motivation-induced behavioral changes may arise via different mechanisms in 
approach versus avoidance motivational states.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0127203
PMCID: PMC4441475
PMID: 26000735 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.


46. Neuroimage. 2016 Nov 1;141:393-398. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2016.07.046. Epub 
2016 Jul 26.

Striatal activation as a neural link between cognitive and perceptual 
flexibility.

Sekutowicz M(1), Schmack K(2), Steimke R(3), Paschke L(4), Sterzer P(5), Walter 
H(5), Stelzel C(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, Charité - Universitätsmedizin 
Berlin, D-10117 Berlin, Germany. Electronic address: 
maria.sekutowicz@charite.de.
(2)Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, Charité - Universitätsmedizin 
Berlin, D-10117 Berlin, Germany.
(3)Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, Charité - Universitätsmedizin 
Berlin, D-10117 Berlin, Germany; Department of Psychology, Technische 
Universität Dresden, D-01062 Dresden, Germany; Berlin School of Mind and Brain, 
Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, D-10117 Berlin, Germany; Department of 
Psychology, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, D-12489 Berlin, Germany.
(4)Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, Charité - Universitätsmedizin 
Berlin, D-10117 Berlin, Germany; Berlin School of Mind and Brain, 
Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, D-10117 Berlin, Germany; Department of 
Psychology, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, D-12489 Berlin, Germany.
(5)Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, Charité - Universitätsmedizin 
Berlin, D-10117 Berlin, Germany; Berlin School of Mind and Brain, 
Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, D-10117 Berlin, Germany; Berlin Center for 
Advanced Neuroimaging, D-10117 Berlin, Germany.
(6)Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, Charité - Universitätsmedizin 
Berlin, D-10117 Berlin, Germany; Berlin School of Mind and Brain, 
Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, D-10117 Berlin, Germany; Department of 
Psychology, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, D-12489 Berlin, Germany; 
International Psychoanalytic University, D-10555 Berlin, Germany.

Our brain continuously evaluates different perceptual interpretations of the 
available sensory data in order to enable flexible updates of conscious 
experience. Individuals' perceptual flexibility can be assessed using ambiguous 
stimuli that cause our perception to continuously switch between two mutually 
exclusive interpretations. Neural processes underlying perceptual switching are 
thought to involve the visual cortex, but also non-sensory brain circuits that 
have been implicated in cognitive processes, such as frontal and parietal 
regions. Perceptual flexibility varies strongly between individuals and has been 
related to dopaminergic neurotransmission. Likewise, there is also considerable 
individual variability in tasks that require flexibility in cognition, and 
dopamine-dependent striato-frontal signals have been associated with processes 
promoting cognitive flexibility. Given the anatomical and neurochemical 
similarities with regard to perceptual and cognitive flexibility, we here probed 
whether individual differences in perceptual flexibility during bistable 
perception are related to individual cognitive flexibility associated neural 
correlates. 126 healthy individuals performed rule-based task switching during 
functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) and reported perceptual switching 
during the viewing of a modified version of the Necker cube. Mean phase duration 
as measure of perceptual flexibility correlated with task-switching associated 
activity in the right putamen as part of the basal ganglia. In addition, we 
found a tentative correlation between perceptual and cognitive flexibility. 
These results indicate that individual differences in cognitive flexibility and 
associated fronto-striatal processing contribute to differences in perceptual 
flexibility. Our findings thus provide empirical support for the general notion 
of shared mechanisms between perception and cognition.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2016.07.046
PMID: 27474521 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Cereb Cortex. 2000 Jul;10(7):706-13. doi: 10.1093/cercor/10.7.706.

Maintaining and shifting attention within left or right hemifield.

Vandenberghe R(1), Duncan J, Arnell KM, Bishop SJ, Herrod NJ, Owen AM, Minhas 
PS, Dupont P, Pickard JD, Orban GA.

Author information:
(1)Laboratorium voor Neuroen Psychofysiologie, Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, 
Belgium. r-vandenberghe@nwu.edu

Positron emission tomography (PET) was used to examine two questions: (i) which 
structures of the intact human brain change their activity with the direction of 
attention to left or right visual field; and (ii) how does activity in these 
structures, and in parietal cortex in particular, depend on the frequency of 
attentional shifts? Subjects were required to discriminate the orientation of 
peripheral gratings. The two main experimental variables were the attended 
hemifield (left or right) and the proportion of trials requiring a shift within 
that hemifield (20% or 80%). A detection control condition was also included. 
Behaviourally, subjects were less accurate and significantly slower when a trial 
required a shift than when it did not. Ventral and lateral occipital areas 
showed significantly higher blood flow levels contralateral to the direction of 
attention. Replicating previous work, there was also a significant main effect 
of the direction of attention in left lateral prefrontal cortex: blood flow 
levels were higher during leftward attention in comparison both to baseline and 
to rightward attention. This left frontal effect reached significance in single 
subjects in whom several activation sites could be distinguished within left 
middle and inferior frontal gyrus. Right and left parietal cortex were activated 
during both left- and right-field attention conditions, with a tendency for 
higher activity levels when attention was directed contralaterally. Contrary to 
the experimental hypothesis, however, parietal regions were not activated 
differentially by high versus low numbers of attentional shifts. The current 
experiment confirms that left frontal convexity is sensitive to manipulations of 
the direction of visuospatial attention. The results do not indicate a specific 
role of parietal cortex in attentional shifting.

DOI: 10.1093/cercor/10.7.706
PMID: 10906317 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Brain Struct Funct. 2019 Jun;224(5):1845-1869. doi: 10.1007/s00429-019-01870-4. 
Epub 2019 Apr 29.

Common and distinct neural correlates of dual-tasking and task-switching: a 
meta-analytic review and a neuro-cognitive processing model of human 
multitasking.

Worringer B(1)(2), Langner R(3)(4), Koch I(5), Eickhoff SB(6)(7), Eickhoff 
CR(7)(8), Binkofski FC(9)(10)(11).

Author information:
(1)Clinical and Cognitive Neurosciences, Department of Neurology, RWTH Aachen 
University Hospital, Pauwelsstr. 30, 52074, Aachen, Germany. 
britta.worringer@uni-duesseldorf.de.
(2)Institute of Occupational, Social and Environmental Medicine, Center for 
Health and Society, Medical Faculty, Heinrich Heine University Düsseldorf, 
Moorenstr. 5, 40225, Düsseldorf, Germany. britta.worringer@uni-duesseldorf.de.
(3)Institute of Systems Neuroscience, Medical Faculty, Heinrich Heine University 
Düsseldorf, Moorenstr. 5, Düsseldorf, Germany. 
robert.langner@uni-duesseldorf.de.
(4)Institute of Neuroscience and Medicine (INM-7), Research Centre Jülich, 
Jülich, Germany. robert.langner@uni-duesseldorf.de.
(5)Institute of Psychology, RWTH Aachen University, Jägerstr. 17-19, 52066, 
Aachen, Germany.
(6)Institute of Systems Neuroscience, Medical Faculty, Heinrich Heine University 
Düsseldorf, Moorenstr. 5, Düsseldorf, Germany.
(7)Institute of Neuroscience and Medicine (INM-7), Research Centre Jülich, 
Jülich, Germany.
(8)Department of Psychiatry, Psychotherapy and Psychosomatics, RWTH Aachen 
University Hospital, Pauwelsstr. 30, 52074, Aachen, Germany.
(9)Clinical and Cognitive Neurosciences, Department of Neurology, RWTH Aachen 
University Hospital, Pauwelsstr. 30, 52074, Aachen, Germany.
(10)Institute for Neuroscience and Medicine (INM-4), Research Center Jülich, 
Pauwelsstr. 30, Jülich, Germany.
(11)Jülich Aachen Research Alliance JARA-BRAIN, Pauwelsstr. 30, Aachen, Germany.

Although there are well-known limitations of the human cognitive system in 
performing two tasks simultaneously (dual-tasking) or alternatingly 
(task-switching), the question for a common vs. distinct neural basis of these 
multitasking limitations is still open. We performed two Activation Likelihood 
Estimation meta-analyses of neuroimaging studies on dual-tasking or 
task-switching and tested for commonalities and differences in the brain regions 
associated with either domain. We found a common core network related to 
multitasking comprising bilateral intraparietal sulcus (IPS), left dorsal 
premotor cortex (dPMC), and right anterior insula. Meta-analytic contrasts 
revealed eight fronto-parietal clusters more consistently activated in 
dual-tasking (bilateral frontal operculum, dPMC, and anterior IPS, left inferior 
frontal sulcus and left inferior frontal gyrus) and, conversely, four clusters 
(left inferior frontal junction, posterior IPS, and precuneus as well as 
frontomedial cortex) more consistently activated in task-switching. Together 
with sub-analyses of preparation effects in task-switching, our results argue 
against purely passive structural processing limitations in multitasking. Based 
on these findings and drawing on current theorizing, we present a 
neuro-cognitive processing model of multitasking.

DOI: 10.1007/s00429-019-01870-4
PMCID: PMC7254756
PMID: 31037397 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest The authors declare that 
they have no conflict of interest.


49. Neuropsychology. 2018 Jan;32(1):31-39. doi: 10.1037/neu0000406. Epub 2017 Dec 
14.

Coactivation of cognitive control networks during task switching.

Yin S(1), Deák G(2), Chen A(1).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Cognition and Personality of Ministry of Education, Faculty 
of Psychology, Southwest University.
(2)Department of Cognitive Science, University of California, San Diego.

OBJECTIVE: The ability to flexibly switch between tasks is considered an 
important component of cognitive control that involves frontal and parietal 
cortical areas. The present study was designed to characterize network dynamics 
across multiple brain regions during task switching.
METHOD: Functional magnetic resonance images (fMRI) were captured during a 
standard rule-switching task to identify switching-related brain regions. 
Multiregional psychophysiological interaction (PPI) analysis was used to examine 
effective connectivity between these regions.
RESULTS: During switching trials, behavioral performance declined and activation 
of a generic cognitive control network increased. Concurrently, task-related 
connectivity increased within and between cingulo-opercular and fronto-parietal 
cognitive control networks. Notably, the left inferior frontal junction (IFJ) 
was most consistently coactivated with the 2 cognitive control networks. 
Furthermore, switching-dependent effective connectivity was negatively 
correlated with behavioral switch costs. The strength of effective connectivity 
between left IFJ and other regions in the networks predicted individual 
differences in switch costs.
CONCLUSIONS: Task switching was supported by coactivated connections within 
cognitive control networks, with left IFJ potentially acting as a key hub 
between the fronto-parietal and cingulo-opercular networks. (PsycINFO Database 
Record

(c) 2018 APA, all rights reserved).

DOI: 10.1037/neu0000406
PMID: 29239622 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Soc Cogn Affect Neurosci. 2015 Aug;10(8):1045-53. doi: 10.1093/scan/nsu153. Epub 
2014 Dec 30.

Emotional task management: neural correlates of switching between affective and 
non-affective task-sets.

Reeck C(1), Egner T(2).

Author information:
(1)Columbia Business School, Columbia University, New York, NY, USA.
(2)Center for Cognitive Neuroscience and Department of Psychology & 
Neuroscience, Duke University, Durham, NC 27708, USA tobias.egner@duke.edu 
crystal.reeck@columbia.edu.

Although task-switching has been investigated extensively, its interaction with 
emotionally salient task content remains unclear. Prioritized processing of 
affective stimulus content may enhance accessibility of affective task-sets and 
generate increased interference when switching between affective and 
non-affective task-sets. Previous research has demonstrated that more dominant 
task-sets experience greater switch costs, as they necessitate active inhibition 
during performance of less entrenched tasks. Extending this logic to the 
affective domain, the present experiment examined (a) whether affective 
task-sets are more dominant than non-affective ones, and (b) what neural 
mechanisms regulate affective task-sets, so that weaker, non-affective task-sets 
can be executed. While undergoing functional magnetic resonance imaging, 
participants categorized face stimuli according to either their gender 
(non-affective task) or their emotional expression (affective task). Behavioral 
results were consistent with the affective task dominance hypothesis: 
participants were slower to switch to the affective task, and cross-task 
interference was strongest when participants tried to switch from the affective 
to the non-affective task. These behavioral costs of controlling the affective 
task-set were mirrored in the activation of a right-lateralized frontostriatal 
network previously implicated in task-set updating and response inhibition. 
Connectivity between amygdala and right ventrolateral prefrontal cortex was 
especially pronounced during cross-task interference from affective features.

© The Author (2014). Published by Oxford University Press. For Permissions, 
please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/scan/nsu153
PMCID: PMC4526474
PMID: 25552571 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Hum Brain Mapp. 2021 Oct 1;42(14):4643-4657. doi: 10.1002/hbm.25573. Epub 2021 
Jun 29.

Dissociable theta networks underlie the switch and mixing costs during task 
switching.

McKewen M(1)(2)(3), Cooper PS(4), Skippen P(1)(2)(5), Wong ASW(1)(3), Michie 
PT(1)(2), Karayanidis F(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Functional Neuroimaging Laboratory, School of Psychology, University of 
Newcastle, Callaghan, New South Wales, Australia.
(2)Priority Research Centre for Brain and Mental Health, University of 
Newcastle, Callaghan, New South Wales, Australia.
(3)Priority Research Centre for Stroke and Brain Injury, University of 
Newcastle, Callaghan, New South Wales, Australia.
(4)Turner Institute for Brain and Mental Health, Monash University, Melbourne, 
Victoria, Australia.
(5)Centre for Pain IMPACT, Neuroscience Research Australia (NeuRA), Randwick, 
New South Wales, Australia.

During task-switching paradigms, both event-related potentials and 
time-frequency analyses show switch and mixing effects at frontal and parietal 
sites. Switch and mixing effects are associated with increased power in broad 
frontoparietal networks, typically stronger in the theta band (~4-8 Hz). 
However, it is not yet known whether mixing and switch costs rely upon common or 
distinct networks. In this study, we examine proactive and reactive control 
networks linked to task switching and mixing effects, and whether strength of 
connectivity in these networks is associated with behavioural outcomes. 
Participants (n = 197) completed a cued-trials task-switching paradigm with 
concurrent electroencephalography, after substantial task practice to establish 
strong cue-stimulus-response representations. We used inter-site phase 
clustering, a measure of functional connectivity across electrode sites, to 
establish cross-site connectivity from a frontal and a parietal seed. Distinct 
theta networks were activated during proactive and reactive control periods. 
During the preparation interval, mixing effects were associated with 
connectivity from the frontal seed to parietal sites, and switch effects with 
connectivity from the parietal seed to occipital sites. Lateralised occipital 
connectivity was common to both switch and mixing effects. After target onset, 
frontal and parietal seeds showed a similar pattern of connectivity across trial 
types. These findings are consistent with distinct and common proactive control 
networks and common reactive networks in highly practised task-switching 
performers.

© 2021 The Authors. Human Brain Mapping published by Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/hbm.25573
PMCID: PMC8410519
PMID: 34184803 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.


52. Brain Res Cogn Brain Res. 2000 Jan;9(1):103-9. doi: 
10.1016/s0926-6410(99)00029-4.

Prefrontal cortex activation in task switching: an event-related fMRI study.

Dove A(1), Pollmann S, Schubert T, Wiggins CJ, von Cramon DY.

Author information:
(1)Max Planck Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience, Stephanstr. 1a, D-04103, 
Leipzig, Germany. dove@cns.mpg.de

When a switch between two tasks has to be carried out, performance is slower 
than in trials where the same task is performed repeatedly. This finding has 
been attributed to time-consuming control processes required for task switching. 
Previous results of other paradigms investigating cognitive control processes 
suggested that prefrontal cortex is involved in executive control. We used 
event-related fMRI to investigate prefrontal cortex involvement in task 
switching. Regions in the lateral prefrontal and premotor cortex bilaterally, 
the anterior insula bilaterally, the left intraparietal sulcus, the SMA/pre-SMA 
region and the cuneus/precuneus were activated by the task repetition condition 
and showed additional activation in the task switch condition. This confirmed 
the hypothesis that lateral prefrontal cortex is involved in task switching. 
However, the results also showed that this region is neither the only region 
involved in task switching nor a region specifically involved in task switching.

DOI: 10.1016/s0926-6410(99)00029-4
PMID: 10666562 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Neuroimage. 2018 Oct 15;180(Pt B):417-427. doi: 
10.1016/j.neuroimage.2017.06.081. Epub 2017 Jul 8.

Dynamic graph metrics: Tutorial, toolbox, and tale.

Sizemore AE(1), Bassett DS(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Bioengineering, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, 
19104, USA.
(2)Department of Bioengineering, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, 
19104, USA; Department of Electrical and Systems Engineering, University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, 19104, USA. Electronic address: 
dsb@seas.upenn.edu.

The central nervous system is composed of many individual units - from cells to 
areas - that are connected with one another in a complex pattern of functional 
interactions that supports perception, action, and cognition. One natural and 
parsimonious representation of such a system is a graph in which nodes (units) 
are connected by edges (interactions). While applicable across spatiotemporal 
scales, species, and cohorts, the traditional graph approach is unable to 
address the complexity of time-varying connectivity patterns that may be 
critically important for an understanding of emotional and cognitive state, 
task-switching, adaptation and development, or aging and disease progression. 
Here we survey a set of tools from applied mathematics that offer measures to 
characterize dynamic graphs. Along with this survey, we offer suggestions for 
visualization and a publicly-available MATLAB toolbox to facilitate the 
application of these metrics to existing or yet-to-be acquired neuroimaging 
data. We illustrate the toolbox by applying it to a previously published data 
set of time-varying functional graphs, but note that the tools can also be 
applied to time-varying structural graphs or to other sorts of relational data 
entirely. Our aim is to provide the neuroimaging community with a useful set of 
tools, and an intuition regarding how to use them, for addressing emerging 
questions that hinge on accurate and creative analyses of dynamic graphs.

Copyright © 2017 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2017.06.081
PMCID: PMC5758445
PMID: 28698107 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


54. J Cogn Neurosci. 2023 Jun 1;35(6):919-940. doi: 10.1162/jocn_a_01988.

The Neural Correlates of Updating and Gating in Procedural Working Memory.

Nir-Cohen G(1), Egner T(2), Kessler Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Beer Sheva, Israel.
(2)Duke University, Durham, NC.

Goal-directed behavior relies on maintaining relevant goals in working memory 
(WM) and updating them when required. Computational modeling, behavioral, and 
neuroimaging work has previously identified the processes and brain regions 
involved in selecting, updating, and maintaining declarative information, such 
as letters and pictures. However, the neural substrates that underlie the 
analogous processes that operate on procedural information, namely, task goals, 
are currently unknown. Forty-three participants were therefore scanned with fMRI 
while performing a procedural version of the reference-back paradigm that 
allowed for the decomposition of WM updating processes into gate-opening, 
gate-closing, task switching, and task cue conflict components. Significant 
behavioral costs were observed for each of these components, with interactions 
indicating facilitation between gate-opening and task switching, and a 
modulation of cue conflict by gate state. In neural terms, opening the gate to 
procedural WM was associated with activity in medial pFC, posterior parietal 
cortex (PPC), the basal ganglia (BG), thalamus, and midbrain, but only when the 
task set needed to be updated. Closing the gate to procedural WM was associated 
with frontoparietal and BG activity specifically in conditions where conflicting 
task cues had to be ignored. Task switching was associated with activity in the 
medial pFC/ACC, PPC, and BG, whereas cue conflict was associated with PPC and BG 
activity during gate closing but was abolished when the gate was already closed. 
These results are discussed in relation to declarative WM and to gating models 
of WM.

© 2023 Massachusetts Institute of Technology.

DOI: 10.1162/jocn_a_01988
PMID: 36976906 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Soc Cogn Affect Neurosci. 2024 Dec 13;19(1):nsae077. doi: 10.1093/scan/nsae077.

Altered default-mode and frontal-parietal network pattern underlie adaptiveness 
of emotion regulation flexibility following task-switch training.

Gao W(1), Biswal B(2), Zhou X(1), Xiao Z(3), Yang J(1), Li Y(1), Yuan J(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Brain and Psychological Science, Sichuan Normal University, 
Chengdu, Sichuan 610066, China.
(2)Department of Biomedical Engineering, New Jersey Institute of Technology, 
Newark, NJ 07102, United States.
(3)State Key Laboratory of Cognitive Neuroscience and Learning, IDG/McGovern 
Institute for Brain Research, Beijing Normal University, Beijing 100875, China.
(4)Sichuan Key Laboratory of Psychology and Behavior of Discipline Inspection 
and Supervision, Sichuan Normal University, Chengdu 610066, China.

Emotion regulation flexibility (ERF) refers to one's ability to respond flexibly 
in complex environments. Adaptiveness of ERF has been associated with cognitive 
flexibility, which can be improved by task-switching training. However, the 
impact of task-switching training on ERF and its underlying neural mechanisms 
remain unclear. To address this issue, we examined the effects of training on 
individuals' adaptiveness of ERF by assessing altered brain network patterns. 
Two groups of participants completed behavioral experiments and resting-state 
fMRI before and after training. Behavioral results showed higher adaptiveness 
scores and network analysis observed a higher number of connectivity edges, in 
the training group compared to the control group. Moreover, we found decreased 
connectivity strength within the default mode network (DMN) and increased 
connectivity strength within the frontoparietal network (FPN) in the training 
group. Furthermore, the task-switch training also led to decreased DMN-FPN 
interconnectivity, which was significantly correlated to increased adaptiveness 
of ERF scores. These findings suggest that the adaptiveness of ERF can be 
supported by altered patterns with the brain network through task-switch 
training, especially the increased network segregation between the DMN and FPN.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press.

DOI: 10.1093/scan/nsae077
PMCID: PMC11642612
PMID: 39575823 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known 
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.


56. J Neurosci. 2023 Jan 11;43(2):282-292. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0464-22.2022. Epub 
2022 Dec 5.

Lingering Neural Representations of Past Task Features Adversely Affect Future 
Behavior.

Rangel BO(1)(2), Hazeltine E(2)(3), Wessel JR(4)(3)(5).

Author information:
(1)Interdisciplinary Graduate Program in Neuroscience, University of Iowa, Iowa 
City, Iowa 52245 benjamin-rangel@uiowa.edu jan-wessel@uiowa.edu.
(2)Cognitive Control Collaborative, University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa 52245.
(3)Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, University of Iowa, Iowa 
City, Iowa 52245.
(4)Cognitive Control Collaborative, University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa 52245 
benjamin-rangel@uiowa.edu jan-wessel@uiowa.edu.
(5)Department of Neurology, University of Iowa Hospitals and Clinics, Iowa City, 
Iowa 52242.

During goal-directed behavior, humans purportedly form and retrieve so-called 
event files, conjunctive representations that link context-specific information 
about stimuli, their associated actions, and the expected action outcomes. The 
automatic formation, and later retrieval, of such conjunctive representations 
can substantially facilitate efficient action selection. However, recent 
behavioral work suggests that these event files may also adversely affect future 
behavior, especially when action requirements have changed between successive 
instances of the same task context (e.g., during task switching). Here, we 
directly tested this hypothesis with a recently developed method for measuring 
the strength of the neural representations of context-specific stimulus-action 
conjunctions (i.e., event files). Thirty-five male and female adult humans 
performed a task switching paradigm while undergoing EEG recordings. Replicating 
previous behavioral work, we found that changes in action requirements between 
two spaced repetitions of the same task incurred a significant reaction time 
cost. By combining multivariate pattern analysis and representational similarity 
analysis of the EEG recordings with linear mixed-effects modeling of 
trial-to-trial behavior, we then found that the magnitude of this behavioral 
cost was directly proportional to the strength of the conjunctive representation 
formed during the most recent previous exposure to the same task, that is, the 
most recent event file. This confirms that the formation of conjunctive 
representations of specific task contexts, stimuli, and actions in the brain can 
indeed adversely affect future behavior. Moreover, these findings demonstrate 
the potential of neural decoding of complex task set representations toward the 
prediction of behavior beyond the current trial.SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT 
Understanding how the human brain organizes individual components of complex 
tasks is paramount for understanding higher-order cognition. During complex 
tasks, the brain forms conjunctive representations that link individual task 
features (contexts, stimuli, actions), which aids future performance of the same 
task. However, this can have adverse effects when the required sequence of 
actions within a task changes. We decoded conjunctive representations from 
electroencephalographic recordings during a task that included frequent changes 
to the rules determining the response. Indeed, stronger initial conjunctive 
representations predicted significant future response-time costs when task 
contexts repeated with changed response requirements. Showing that the formation 
of conjunctive task representations can have negative future effects generates 
novel insights into complex behavior and cognition, including task switching, 
planning, and problem solving.

Copyright © 2023 the authors.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0464-22.2022
PMCID: PMC9838716
PMID: 36639905 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Brain. 2022 Oct 21;145(10):3698-3710. doi: 10.1093/brain/awac205.

Sensory experience modulates the reorganization of auditory regions for 
executive processing.

Manini B(1), Vinogradova V(2), Woll B(1), Cameron D(3), Eimer M(4), Cardin V(1).

Author information:
(1)Deafness, Cognition and Language Research Centre and Department of 
Experimental Psychology, UCL, London WC1H 0PD, UK.
(2)School of Psychology, University of East Anglia, Norwich NR4 7TJ, UK.
(3)Norwich Medical School, University of East Anglia, Norwich NR4 7TJ, UK.
(4)Department of Psychological Sciences, Birkbeck, University of London, London 
WC1E 7HX, UK.

Crossmodal plasticity refers to the reorganization of sensory cortices in the 
absence of their typical main sensory input. Understanding this phenomenon 
provides insights into brain function and its potential for change and 
enhancement. Using functional MRI, we investigated how early deafness influences 
crossmodal plasticity and the organization of executive functions in the adult 
human brain. Deaf (n = 25; age: mean = 41.68, range = 19-66, SD = 14.38; 16 
female, 9 male) and hearing (n = 20; age: mean = 37.50, range = 18-66, SD = 
16.85; 15 female, 5 male) participants performed four visual tasks tapping into 
different components of executive processing: task switching, working memory, 
planning and inhibition. Our results show that deaf individuals specifically 
recruit 'auditory' regions during task switching. Neural activity in superior 
temporal regions, most significantly in the right hemisphere, are good 
predictors of behavioural performance during task switching in the group of deaf 
individuals, highlighting the functional relevance of the observed cortical 
reorganization. Our results show executive processing in typically sensory 
regions, suggesting that the development and ultimate role of brain regions are 
influenced by perceptual environmental experience.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Guarantors of Brain.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/awac205
PMCID: PMC9586534
PMID: 35653493 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Neuropsychologia. 2018 Aug;117:352-363. doi: 
10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2018.06.023. Epub 2018 Jun 28.

Language and cognitive control networks in bilinguals and monolinguals.

Anderson JAE(1), Chung-Fat-Yim A(1), Bellana B(2), Luk G(3), Bialystok E(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, York University, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(2)Department of Psychology, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(3)Graduate School of Education, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, USA.
(4)Department of Psychology, York University, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. 
Electronic address: ellenb@yorku.ca.

Neuroimaging studies have reported overlapping neural circuits for cognitive 
control when engaging in tasks that involve verbal and nonverbal stimuli in 
young adult bilinguals. However, no study to date has examined the neural basis 
of verbal and nonverbal task switching in both monolinguals and bilinguals due 
to the inherent challenge of testing verbal task switching with monolinguals. 
Therefore, it is not clear whether the finding for overlapping networks is 
unique to bilingualism or indicative of general cognitive control. To address 
this question, the current study compared functional neural activation for young 
adults who were bilingual speakers of English and French or monolingual English 
speakers who had limited French learning experience ("functional monolinguals") 
on verbal and nonverbal task switching. Analyses showed common variance 
explaining general cognitive control in task switching across verbal and 
nonverbal domains for both groups, in line with the explanation that task 
switching involves general cognitive control, as well as unique brain regions 
recruited by monolinguals and bilinguals. Specifically, beyond the processing 
common to the tasks, monolinguals also recruited distinct networks for each of 
verbal and nonverbal switching but bilinguals used a common shared network. 
Thus, the domain-general aspect of switching is different for monolinguals and 
bilinguals.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2018.06.023
PMCID: PMC6086755
PMID: 29959966 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Neuroscience. 2016 Aug 4;329:349-62. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2016.05.026. 
Epub 2016 May 20.

White matter and task-switching in young adults: A Diffusion Tensor Imaging 
study.

Vallesi A(1), Mastrorilli E(2), Causin F(3), D'Avella D(4), Bertoldo A(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroscience, University of Padova, Italy; Centro di 
Neuroscienze Cognitive, University of Padova, Italy. Electronic address: 
antonino.vallesi@unipd.it.
(2)Department of Neuroscience, University of Padova, Italy; Department of 
Information Engineering, University of Padova, Italy.
(3)Neuroradiology Unit, Azienda Ospedaliera di Padova, Italy.
(4)Department of Neuroscience, University of Padova, Italy; Centro di 
Neuroscienze Cognitive, University of Padova, Italy.
(5)Department of Information Engineering, University of Padova, Italy.

The capacity to flexibly switch between different task rules has been previously 
associated with distributed fronto-parietal networks, predominantly in the left 
hemisphere for phasic switching sub-processes, and in the right hemisphere for 
more tonic aspects of task-switching, such as rule maintenance and management. 
It is thus likely that the white matter (WM) connectivity between these regions 
is critical in sustaining the flexibility required by task-switching. This study 
examined the relationship between WM microstructure in young adults and 
task-switching performance in different paradigms: classical shape-color, 
spatial and grammatical tasks. The main results showed an association between WM 
integrity in anterior portions of the corpus callosum (genu and body) and a 
sustained measure of task-switching performance. In particular, a higher 
fractional anisotropy and a lower radial diffusivity in these WM regions were 
associated with smaller mixing costs both in the spatial task-switching paradigm 
and in the shape-color one, as confirmed by a conjunction analysis. No 
association was found with behavioral measures obtained in the grammatical 
task-switching paradigm. The switch costs, a measure of phasic switching 
processes, were not correlated with WM microstructure in any task. This study 
shows that a more efficient inter-hemispheric connectivity within the frontal 
lobes favors sustained task-switching processes, especially with task contexts 
embedding non-verbal components.

Copyright © 2016 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2016.05.026
PMCID: PMC4915443
PMID: 27217212 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Neuropsychologia. 2016 Oct;91:211-221. doi: 
10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2016.08.009. Epub 2016 Aug 9.

Functional brain and age-related changes associated with congruency in task 
switching.

Eich TS(1), Parker D(2), Liu D(2), Oh H(2), Razlighi Q(2), Gazes Y(2), Habeck 
C(2), Stern Y(2).

Author information:
(1)Cognitive Neuroscience Division and The Taub Institute, Department of 
Neurology, Columbia University Medical Center, United States. Electronic 
address: tse4@columbia.edu.
(2)Cognitive Neuroscience Division and The Taub Institute, Department of 
Neurology, Columbia University Medical Center, United States.

Alternating between completing two simple tasks, as opposed to completing only 
one task, has been shown to produce costs to performance and changes to neural 
patterns of activity, effects which are augmented in old age. Cognitive conflict 
may arise from factors other than switching tasks, however. Sensorimotor 
congruency (whether stimulus-response mappings are the same or different for the 
two tasks) has been shown to behaviorally moderate switch costs in older, but 
not younger adults. In the current study, we used fMRI to investigate the 
neurobiological mechanisms of response-conflict congruency effects within a task 
switching paradigm in older (N=75) and younger (N=62) adults. Behaviorally, 
incongruency moderated age-related differences in switch costs. Neurally, switch 
costs were associated with greater activation in the dorsal attention network 
for older relative to younger adults. We also found that older adults recruited 
an additional set of brain areas in the ventral attention network to a greater 
extent than did younger adults to resolve congruency-related response-conflict. 
These results suggest both a network and an age-based dissociation between 
congruency and switch costs in task switching.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2016.08.009
PMCID: PMC5075252
PMID: 27520472 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Hum Brain Mapp. 2012 Jan;33(1):130-42. doi: 10.1002/hbm.21199. Epub 2011 Mar 9.

Domain general and domain preferential brain regions associated with different 
types of task switching: a meta-analysis.

Kim C(1), Cilles SE, Johnson NF, Gold BT.

Author information:
(1)Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology, University of Kentucky, Lexington, 
Kentucky 40536-0098, USA.

One of our highest evolved functions as human beings is our capacity to switch 
between multiple tasks effectively. A body of research has identified a 
distributed frontoparietal network of brain regions which contribute to task 
switching. However, relatively less is known about whether some brain regions 
may contribute to switching in a domain-general manner while others may be more 
preferential for different kinds of switching. To explore this issue, we 
conducted three meta-analyses focusing on different types of task switching 
frequently used in the literature (perceptual, response, and context switching), 
and created a conjunction map of these distinct switch types. A total of 36 
switching studies with 562 activation coordinates were analyzed using the 
activation likelihood estimation method. Common areas associated with switching 
across switch type included the inferior frontal junction and posterior parietal 
cortex. In contrast, domain-preferential activation was observed for perceptual 
switching in the dorsal portion of the premotor cortex and for context switching 
in frontopolar cortex. Our results suggest that some regions within the 
frontoparietal network contribute to domain-general switching processes while 
others contribute to more domain-preferential processes, according to the type 
of task switch performed.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/hbm.21199
PMCID: PMC3421461
PMID: 21391260 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Exp Gerontol. 2022 Mar;159:111673. doi: 10.1016/j.exger.2021.111673. Epub 2021 
Dec 24.

Planning in amnestic mild cognitive impairment: an fMRI study.

Lejko N(1), Tumati S(2), Opmeer EM(3), Marsman JC(4), Reesink FE(5), De Deyn 
PP(6), Aleman A(7), Ćurčić-Blake B(4).

Author information:
(1)University of Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen, Department of 
Biomedical Sciences of Cells & Systems, Cognitive Neuroscience Center, 
Groningen, the Netherlands. Electronic address: n.lejko@umcg.nl.
(2)University of Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen, Department of 
Biomedical Sciences of Cells & Systems, Cognitive Neuroscience Center, 
Groningen, the Netherlands; Neuropsychopharmacology Research Group, Sunnybrook 
Research Institute, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(3)University of Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen, Department of 
Biomedical Sciences of Cells & Systems, Cognitive Neuroscience Center, 
Groningen, the Netherlands; Windesheim University of Applied Sciences, 
Department of Health and Welfare, Zwolle, the Netherlands.
(4)University of Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen, Department of 
Biomedical Sciences of Cells & Systems, Cognitive Neuroscience Center, 
Groningen, the Netherlands.
(5)Department of Neurology and Alzheimer Center Groningen, University of 
Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, the Netherlands.
(6)Department of Neurology and Alzheimer Center Groningen, University of 
Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, the Netherlands; 
Laboratory of Neurochemistry and Behavior, Institute Born-Bunge, University of 
Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium.
(7)University of Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen, Department of 
Biomedical Sciences of Cells & Systems, Cognitive Neuroscience Center, 
Groningen, the Netherlands; Shenzhen Key Laboratory of Affective and Social 
Neuroscience, Center for Brain Disorders and Cognitive Sciences, Shenzhen 
University, Shenzhen, China.

INTRODUCTION: The memory impairment that is characteristic of amnestic mild 
cognitive impairment (aMCI) is often accompanied by difficulties in executive 
functioning, including planning. Though planning deficits in aMCI are well 
documented, their neural correlates are largely unknown, and have not yet been 
investigated with functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI).
OBJECTIVES: The aim of this study was to: (1) identify differences in brain 
activity and connectivity during planning between people with aMCI and 
cognitively healthy older adults, and (2) find whether planning-related activity 
and connectivity are associated with cognitive performance and symptoms of 
apathy.
METHODS: Twenty-five people with aMCI and 15 cognitively healthy older adults 
performed a visuospatial planning task (Tower of London; ToL) during fMRI. 
Task-related brain activation, spatial maps of task-related independent 
components, and seed-to-voxel functional connectivity were compared between the 
two groups and regressed against measures of executive functions (Trail Making 
Test difference score, TMT B-A; Digit Symbol Substitution Test, DSST), delayed 
recall (Rey Auditory Verbal Learning Test), and apathy (Apathy Evaluation 
Scale).
RESULTS: People with aMCI scored lower on task-switching (TMT B-A), working 
memory (DSST), and planning (ToL). During planning, people with aMCI had less 
activation in the bilateral anterior calcarine sulcus/cuneus, the bilateral 
temporal cortices, the left precentral gyrus, the thalamus, and the right 
cerebellum. Across all participants, higher planning-related activity in the 
supplementary motor area, the retrosplenial cortex and surrounding areas, and 
the right temporal cortex was related to better delayed recall. There were no 
between-group differences in functional connectivity, nor were there any 
associations between connectivity and cognition. We also did not find any 
associations between brain activity or connectivity and apathy.
CONCLUSION: Impaired planning in people with aMCI appears to be accompanied by 
lower activation in a diffuse cortico-thalamic network. Across all participants, 
higher planning-related activity in parieto-occipital, temporal, and frontal 
areas was related to better memory performance. The results point to the 
relevance of planning deficits for understanding aMCI and extend its clinical 
and neurobiological signature.

Copyright © 2021 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.exger.2021.111673
PMID: 34958871 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Psychiatry Res Neuroimaging. 2016 Feb 28;248:94-104. doi: 
10.1016/j.pscychresns.2016.01.003. Epub 2016 Jan 4.

Altered balance of functional brain networks in Schizophrenia.

Woodward TS(1), Leong K(2), Sanford N(3), Tipper CM(3), Lavigne KM(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, 
Canada; BC Mental Health and Addictions Research Institute, Provincial Health 
Services Authority, Vancouver, BC, Canada. Electronic address: 
todd.woodward@ubc.ca.
(2)Department of Psychiatry, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, 
Canada.
(3)Department of Psychiatry, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, 
Canada; BC Mental Health and Addictions Research Institute, Provincial Health 
Services Authority, Vancouver, BC, Canada.

Activity in dorsal attention (DAN) and frontoparietal (FPN) functional brain 
networks is linked to allocation of attention to external stimuli, and activity 
in the default-mode network (DMN) is linked to allocation of attention to 
internal representations. Tasks requiring attention to external stimuli shift 
activity to the DAN/FPN and away from the DMN, and optimal task performance 
depends on balancing DAN/FPN against DMN activity. The current functional 
magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) study assessed the balance of DAN/FPN and DMN 
activity in 13 schizophrenia patients and 13 healthy controls while they were 
engaged in a task switching Stroop paradigm which demanded internally directed 
attention to task instructions. The typical pattern of reciprocity between the 
DAN/FPN and DMN was observed for healthy controls but not for patients, 
suggesting a reduction in the internally focussed thought important for 
maintenance of instructions and strategies in schizophrenia. The observed 
alteration in the balance between DAN/FPN and DMN in patients may reflect a 
general mechanism underlying multiple forms of cognitive impairment in 
schizophrenia, including global processing deficits such as cognitive 
inefficiency and impaired context processing.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pscychresns.2016.01.003
PMID: 26786152 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Neuroscience. 2015 Jan 29;285:227-35. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2014.11.024. 
Epub 2014 Nov 20.

Performance monitoring and behavioral adaptation during task switching: an fMRI 
study.

von der Gablentz J(1), Tempelmann C(2), Münte TF(3), Heldmann M(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Lübeck, Ratzeburger Allee 160, D-23538 
Lübeck, Germany. Electronic address: janina.gablentz@neuro.uni-luebeck.de.
(2)Department of Neurology, Otto-von-Guericke University, Leipziger Strasse 44, 
D-39120 Magdeburg, Germany.
(3)Department of Neurology, University of Lübeck, Ratzeburger Allee 160, D-23538 
Lübeck, Germany.

Despite significant advances, the neural correlates and neurochemical mechanisms 
involved in performance monitoring and behavioral adaptation are still a matter 
for debate. Here, we used a modified Eriksen-Flanker task in a magnetic 
resonance imaging (MRI) study that required the participants to derive the 
correct stimulus-response association based on a feedback given after each 
flanker stimulus. Participants had to continuously monitor and adapt their 
performance as the stimulus-response association switched after a jittered time 
interval without notice. After every switch an increase of reaction times was 
observed. At the neural level, the feedback indicating the need to switch was 
associated with activation of the precuneus, the cingulate cortex, the insula 
and a brainstem region tentatively identified as the locus coeruleus. This 
brainstem system appears to interact with this cortical network and seems to be 
essential for performance monitoring and behavioral adaptation. In contrast, the 
cerebellum crus and prefrontal areas are activated during error feedback 
processing. Furthermore we found activations of the hippocampus and 
parahippocampal gyrus bilaterally after a correct feedback in learnable 
stimulus-response associations. These results highlight the contribution of 
brainstem nuclei to performance adaptation.

Copyright © 2014 IBRO. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2014.11.024
PMID: 25446349 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Biol Psychiatry. 2023 Oct 1;94(7):580-590. doi: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2023.03.024. 
Epub 2023 Apr 7.

Altered Brain Dynamics Across Bipolar Disorder and Schizophrenia During Rest and 
Task Switching Revealed by Overlapping Brain States.

Ye J(1), Sun H(2), Gao S(2), Dadashkarimi J(3), Rosenblatt M(2), Rodriguez 
RX(4), Mehta S(5), Jiang R(5), Noble S(5), Westwater ML(5), Scheinost D(6).

Author information:
(1)Interdepartmental Neuroscience Program, Yale University, New Haven, 
Connecticut. Electronic address: jean.ye@yale.edu.
(2)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Yale University, New Haven, 
Connecticut.
(3)Department of Computer Science, Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut.
(4)Interdepartmental Neuroscience Program, Yale University, New Haven, 
Connecticut.
(5)Department of Radiology & Biomedical Imaging, Yale School of Medicine, New 
Haven, Connecticut.
(6)Interdepartmental Neuroscience Program, Yale University, New Haven, 
Connecticut; Department of Biomedical Engineering, Yale University, New Haven, 
Connecticut; Department of Radiology & Biomedical Imaging, Yale School of 
Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut; Child Study Center, Yale School of Medicine, 
New Haven, Connecticut; Department of Statistics and Data Science, Yale 
University, New Haven, Connecticut.

Comment in
    Biol Psychiatry. 2023 Oct 1;94(7):528-530. doi: 
10.1016/j.biopsych.2023.07.015.

BACKGROUND: Individuals with bipolar disorder (BD) and schizophrenia (SCZ) show 
aberrant brain dynamics (i.e., altered recruitment or traversal through 
different brain states over time). Existing investigations of brain dynamics 
typically assume that one dominant brain state characterizes each time point. 
However, as multiple brain states likely are engaged at any given moment, this 
approach can obscure alterations in less prominent but critical brain states. 
Here, we examined brain dynamics in BD and SCZ by implementing a novel framework 
that simultaneously assessed the engagement of multiple brain states.
METHODS: Four recurring brain states were identified by applying nonlinear 
manifold learning and k-means clustering to the Human Connectome Project 
task-based functional magnetic resonance imaging data. We then assessed 
moment-to-moment state engagement in 2 independent samples of healthy control 
participants and patients with BD or SCZ using resting-state (N = 336) or 
task-based (N = 217) functional magnetic resonance imaging data. Relative state 
engagement and state engagement variability were extracted and compared across 
groups using multivariate analysis of covariance, controlling for site, 
medication, age, and sex.
RESULTS: Our framework identified dynamic alterations in BD and SCZ, while a 
state discretization approach revealed no significant group differences. 
Participants with BD or SCZ showed reduced state engagement variability, but not 
relative state engagement, across multiple brain states during resting-state and 
task-based functional magnetic resonance imaging. We found decreased state 
engagement variability in older participants and preliminary evidence suggesting 
an association with avolition.
CONCLUSIONS: Assessing multiple brain states simultaneously can reflect the 
complexity of aberrant brain dynamics in BD and SCZ, providing a more 
comprehensive understanding of the neural mechanisms underpinning these 
conditions.

Copyright © 2023 Society of Biological Psychiatry. Published by Elsevier Inc. 
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2023.03.024
PMCID: PMC10524212
PMID: 37031780 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosures The authors report no biomedical 
financial interests or potential conflicts of interest.


66. Neuroimage. 2004 Feb;21(2):687-95. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2003.10.008.

Spatiotemporal brain dynamics during preparatory set shifting: MEG evidence.

Periáñez JA(1), Maestú F, Barceló F, Fernández A, Amo C, Ortiz Alonso T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Cognitive Neuroscience Group (IUNICS), University 
of the Balearic Islands, Palma de Mallorca, Spain.

Humans can flexibly alter a plan of action to adjust their behavior adaptively 
in changing environments. Functional neuroimaging has shown distinct patterns of 
activation across a frontoparietal network responsible for switching and 
updating such plans of action or 'task sets.' However, little is known about the 
temporal order of activations within prefrontal or across with posterior regions 
subserving set-shifting operations. Here, whole-head magnetoencephalography 
(MEG) was used to explore the spatiotemporal brain dynamics in a modified 
version of the Wisconsin card-sorting test (WCST). Our task was designed to 
examine preparation of set-shifting rather than set-acquisition operations time 
locked to context-informative cues. Three cortical regions showed a larger 
number of MEG activity sources in response to shift and relative to nonshift 
cues: (a) inferior frontal gyrus (IFG; BA 45, 47/12), (b) anterior cingulate 
cortex (ACC; BA 24, 32), and (c) supramarginal gyrus (SMG; BA 40). Importantly, 
the timing of MEG activation differed across these regions. The earliest 
shift-related MEG activations were detected at the IFG (100-300 ms postcue 
onset), followed by two further peaks at the ACC (200-300 and 400-500 ms) and 
the SMG (300-400 and 500-600 ms). Several other prefrontal and posterior 
cortical areas were similarly activated by both shift and nonshift preparatory 
cues. The resulting temporal pattern of interactions within prefrontal and 
across with posterior association cortices is coherent with current models of 
task switching and provides novel information about the temporal course of brain 
activations responsible for the executive control of attention.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2003.10.008
PMID: 14980570 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Neuroimage. 2014 Jan 1;84:681-7. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2013.09.061. Epub 
2013 Oct 3.

Switching auditory attention using spatial and non-spatial features recruits 
different cortical networks.

Larson E(1), Lee AK.

Author information:
(1)Institute for Learning and Brain Sciences, University of Washington, 1715 
Columbia Road N, Box 357988, Seattle, WA 98195, USA. Electronic address: 
larsoner@uw.edu.

Switching attention between different stimuli of interest based on particular 
task demands is important in many everyday settings. In audition in particular, 
switching attention between different speakers of interest that are talking 
concurrently is often necessary for effective communication. Recently, it has 
been shown by multiple studies that auditory selective attention suppresses the 
representation of unwanted streams in auditory cortical areas in favor of the 
target stream of interest. However, the neural processing that guides this 
selective attention process is not well understood. Here we investigated the 
cortical mechanisms involved in switching attention based on two different types 
of auditory features. By combining magneto- and electro-encephalography (M-EEG) 
with an anatomical MRI constraint, we examined the cortical dynamics involved in 
switching auditory attention based on either spatial or pitch features. We 
designed a paradigm where listeners were cued in the beginning of each trial to 
switch or maintain attention halfway through the presentation of concurrent 
target and masker streams. By allowing listeners time to switch during a gap in 
the continuous target and masker stimuli, we were able to isolate the mechanisms 
involved in endogenous, top-down attention switching. Our results show a double 
dissociation between the involvement of right temporoparietal junction (RTPJ) 
and the left inferior parietal supramarginal part (LIPSP) in tasks requiring 
listeners to switch attention based on space and pitch features, respectively, 
suggesting that switching attention based on these features involves at least 
partially separate processes or behavioral strategies.

© 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2013.09.061
PMCID: PMC3856289
PMID: 24096028 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


68. J Neurosci. 2018 Dec 12;38(50):10619-10630. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1539-18.2018. 
Epub 2018 Oct 24.

Functional MRI in Macaque Monkeys during Task Switching.

Premereur E(1)(2), Janssen P(1)(2), Vanduffel W(3)(2)(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Lab. voor Neuro- & Psychofysiologie, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(2)Leuven Brain Institute, Leuven, Belgium.
(3)Lab. voor Neuro- & Psychofysiologie, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 
wim@nmr.mgh.harvard.edu.
(4)Athinoula A. Martinos Center for Biomedical Imaging, Massachusetts General 
Hospital, Charlestown, MA, and.
(5)Department of Radiology, Harvard Medical School, Massachusetts, MA.

Nonhuman primates have proven to be a valuable animal model for exploring 
neuronal mechanisms of cognitive control. One important aspect of executive 
control is the ability to switch from one task to another, and task-switching 
paradigms have often been used in human volunteers to uncover the underlying 
neuronal processes. To date, however, no study has investigated task-switching 
paradigms in nonhuman primates during functional magnetic resonance imaging 
(fMRI). We trained two rhesus macaques to switch between arm movement, eye 
movement, and passive fixation tasks during fMRI. Similar to results obtained in 
human volunteers, task switching elicits increased fMRI activations in 
prefrontal cortex, anterior cingulate cortex, orbitofrontal cortex, and caudate 
nucleus. Our results indicate that the macaque monkey is a reliable model with 
which to investigate higher-order cognitive functioning such as task switching. 
As such, these results can pave the way for a detailed investigation of the 
neural basis of complex human behavior.SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT Task switching is 
an important aspect of cognitive control, and task-switching paradigms have 
often been used to investigate higher-order executive functioning in human 
volunteers. We used a task-switching paradigm in the nonhuman primate during 
fMRI and found increased activation mainly in prefrontal areas (46, 45, frontal 
eye field, and anterior cingulate), in orbitofrontal area 12, and in the caudate 
nucleus. These data fit surprisingly well with previous human imaging data, 
proving that the monkey is an excellent model to study task switching with high 
spatiotemporal resolution tools that are currently not applicable in humans. As 
such, our results pave the way for a detailed interrogation of regions 
performing similar executive functions in humans and monkeys.

Copyright © 2018 the authors 0270-6474/18/3810619-12$15.00/0.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1539-18.2018
PMCID: PMC6580658
PMID: 30355629 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


69. PLoS One. 2023 Nov 7;18(11):e0292450. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0292450. 
eCollection 2023.

Anatomically compliant modes of variations: New tools for brain connectivity.

Clementi L(1)(2)(3), Arnone E(4), Santambrogio MD(2), Franceschetti S(5), 
Panzica F(5), Sangalli LM(1).

Author information:
(1)MOX - Department of Mathematics, Politecnico di Milano, Milan, Italy.
(2)Department of Electronics, Information and Bioengineering, Politecnico di 
Milano, Milan, Italy.
(3)CHDS, Center for Health Data Science, Human Technopole, Milan, Italy.
(4)Department of Management, University of Turin, Turin, Italy.
(5)Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Neurologico "C. Besta", Milan, Italy.

Anatomical complexity and data dimensionality present major issues when 
analysing brain connectivity data. The functional and anatomical aspects of the 
connections taking place in the brain are in fact equally relevant and strongly 
intertwined. However, due to theoretical challenges and computational issues, 
their relationship is often overlooked in neuroscience and clinical research. In 
this work, we propose to tackle this problem through Smooth Functional Principal 
Component Analysis, which enables to perform dimensional reduction and 
exploration of the variability in functional connectivity maps, complying with 
the formidably complicated anatomy of the grey matter volume. In particular, we 
analyse a population that includes controls and subjects affected by 
schizophrenia, starting from fMRI data acquired at rest and during a 
task-switching paradigm. For both sessions, we first identify the common modes 
of variation in the entire population. We hence explore whether the subjects' 
expressions along these common modes of variation differ between controls and 
pathological subjects. In each session, we find principal components that are 
significantly differently expressed in the healthy vs pathological subjects 
(with p-values < 0.001), highlighting clearly interpretable differences in the 
connectivity in the two subpopulations. For instance, the second and third 
principal components for the rest session capture the imbalance between the 
Default Mode and Executive Networks characterizing schizophrenia patients.

Copyright: © 2023 Clementi et al. This is an open access article distributed 
under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits 
unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the 
original author and source are credited.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0292450
PMCID: PMC10629624
PMID: 37934760 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.


70. Neuroimage Clin. 2019;22:101707. doi: 10.1016/j.nicl.2019.101707. Epub 2019 Feb 
2.

Dysfunction of attention switching networks in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.

McMackin R(1), Dukic S(2), Broderick M(3), Iyer PM(4), Pinto-Grau M(5), Mohr 
K(6), Chipika R(7), Coffey A(8), Buxo T(9), Schuster C(10), Gavin B(11), Heverin 
M(12), Bede P(13), Pender N(14), Lalor EC(15), Muthuraman M(16), Hardiman O(17), 
Nasseroleslami B(18).

Author information:
(1)Academic Unit of Neurology, Trinity College Dublin, The University of Dublin, 
Ireland. Electronic address: mcmackr@tcd.ie.
(2)Academic Unit of Neurology, Trinity College Dublin, The University of Dublin, 
Ireland. Electronic address: dukics@tcd.ie.
(3)Academic Unit of Neurology, Trinity College Dublin, The University of Dublin, 
Ireland; Trinity Centre for Bioengineering, Trinity College Dublin, The 
University of Dublin, Ireland. Electronic address: brodermi@tcd.ie.
(4)Academic Unit of Neurology, Trinity College Dublin, The University of Dublin, 
Ireland; Beaumont Hospital Dublin, Department of Neurology, Dublin, Ireland. 
Electronic address: parameswaraniyer@beaumont.ie.
(5)Academic Unit of Neurology, Trinity College Dublin, The University of Dublin, 
Ireland; Beaumont Hospital Dublin, Department of Psychology, Dublin, Ireland. 
Electronic address: pintogrm@tcd.ie.
(6)Academic Unit of Neurology, Trinity College Dublin, The University of Dublin, 
Ireland. Electronic address: mohrk@tcd.ie.
(7)Academic Unit of Neurology, Trinity College Dublin, The University of Dublin, 
Ireland; Computational Neuroimaging Group, Trinity College Dublin, The 
University of Dublin, Ireland.. Electronic address: chipikar@tcd.ie.
(8)Academic Unit of Neurology, Trinity College Dublin, The University of Dublin, 
Ireland; Beaumont Hospital Dublin, Department of Neurology, Dublin, Ireland. 
Electronic address: coffeya1@tcd.ie.
(9)Academic Unit of Neurology, Trinity College Dublin, The University of Dublin, 
Ireland. Electronic address: buxhernt@tcd.ie.
(10)Academic Unit of Neurology, Trinity College Dublin, The University of 
Dublin, Ireland; Computational Neuroimaging Group, Trinity College Dublin, The 
University of Dublin, Ireland.. Electronic address: schustec@tcd.ie.
(11)Academic Unit of Neurology, Trinity College Dublin, The University of 
Dublin, Ireland.
(12)Academic Unit of Neurology, Trinity College Dublin, The University of 
Dublin, Ireland. Electronic address: mark.heverin@tcd.ie.
(13)Academic Unit of Neurology, Trinity College Dublin, The University of 
Dublin, Ireland; Computational Neuroimaging Group, Trinity College Dublin, The 
University of Dublin, Ireland.. Electronic address: bedep@tcd.ie.
(14)Academic Unit of Neurology, Trinity College Dublin, The University of 
Dublin, Ireland; Beaumont Hospital Dublin, Department of Neurology, Dublin, 
Ireland.
(15)Academic Unit of Neurology, Trinity College Dublin, The University of 
Dublin, Ireland; Trinity College Institute of Neuroscience, Trinity College 
Dublin, The University of Dublin, Ireland.; Department of Biomedical 
Engineering, University of Rochester, Rochester, New York, USA.. Electronic 
address: edlalor@tcd.ie.
(16)Movement Disorders and Neurostimulation, Biomedical Statistics and 
Multimodal Signal Processing Unit, Department of Neurology, 
Johannes-Gutenberg-University Hospital, Mainz, Germany. Electronic address: 
mmuthura@uni-mainz.de.
(17)Academic Unit of Neurology, Trinity College Dublin, The University of 
Dublin, Ireland; Beaumont Hospital Dublin, Department of Neurology, Dublin, 
Ireland; Computational Neuroimaging Group, Trinity College Dublin, The 
University of Dublin, Ireland.. Electronic address: hardimao@tcd.ie.
(18)Academic Unit of Neurology, Trinity College Dublin, The University of 
Dublin, Ireland. Electronic address: nasserob@tcd.ie.

OBJECTIVE: To localise and characterise changes in cognitive networks in 
Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (ALS) using source analysis of mismatch negativity 
(MMN) waveforms.
RATIONALE: The MMN waveform has an increased average delay in ALS. MMN has been 
attributed to change detection and involuntary attention switching. This 
therefore indicates pathological impairment of the neural network components 
which generate these functions. Source localisation can mitigate the poor 
spatial resolution of sensor-level EEG analysis by associating the sensor-level 
signals to the contributing brain sources. The functional activity in each 
generating source can therefore be individually measured and investigated as a 
quantitative biomarker of impairment in ALS or its sub-phenotypes.
METHODS: MMN responses from 128-channel electroencephalography (EEG) recordings 
in 58 ALS patients and 39 healthy controls were localised to source by three 
separate localisation methods, including beamforming, dipole fitting and exact 
low resolution brain electromagnetic tomography.
RESULTS: Compared with controls, ALS patients showed significant increase in 
power of the left posterior parietal, central and dorsolateral prefrontal 
cortices (false discovery rate = 0.1). This change correlated with impaired 
cognitive flexibility (rho = 0.45, 0.45, 0.47, p = .042, .055, .031 
respectively). ALS patients also exhibited a decrease in the power of dipoles 
representing activity in the inferior frontal (left: p = 5.16 × 10-6, right: 
p = 1.07 × 10-5) and left superior temporal gyri (p = 9.30 × 10-6). These 
patterns were detected across three source localisation methods. Decrease in 
right inferior frontal gyrus activity was a good discriminator of ALS patients 
from controls (AUROC = 0.77) and an excellent discriminator of C9ORF72 
expansion-positive patients from controls (AUROC = 0.95).
INTERPRETATION: Source localization of evoked potentials can reliably 
discriminate patterns of functional network impairment in ALS and ALS subgroups 
during involuntary attention switching. The discriminative ability of the 
detected cognitive changes in specific brain regions are comparable to those of 
functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI). Source analysis of high-density 
EEG patterns has excellent potential to provide non-invasive, data-driven 
quantitative biomarkers of network disruption that could be harnessed as novel 
neurophysiology-based outcome measures in clinical trials.

Copyright © 2019 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.nicl.2019.101707
PMCID: PMC6365983
PMID: 30735860 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Cerebellum. 2023 Aug;22(4):588-600. doi: 10.1007/s12311-022-01418-z. Epub 2022 
Jun 3.

Cerebello-basal Ganglia Networks and Cortical Network Global Efficiency.

Jackson TB(1), Bernard JA(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, Texas A&M University, 4235 
TAMU, College Station, TX, 77843, USA. bjackson@tamu.edu.
(2)Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, Texas A&M University, 4235 
TAMU, College Station, TX, 77843, USA.
(3)Texas A&M Institute for Neuroscience, Texas A&M University, 4235 TAMU, 
College Station, TX, 77843, USA.

The cerebellum (CB) and basal ganglia (BG) each have topographically distinct 
functional subregions that are functionally and anatomically interconnected with 
cortical regions through discrete thalamic loops and with each other via 
disynaptic connections, with previous work detailing high levels of functional 
connectivity between these phylogenetically ancient regions. It was posited that 
this CB-BG network provides support for cortical systems processing, spanning 
cognitive, emotional, and motor domains, implying that subcortical network 
measures are strongly related to cortical network measures (Bostan & Strick, 
2018); however, it is currently unknown how network measures within distinct 
CB-BG networks relate to cortical network measures. Here, 122 regions of 
interest comprising cognitive and motor CB-BG networks and 7 canonical cortical 
resting-state were used to investigate whether the integration (quantified using 
global efficiency, GE) of cognitive CB-BG network (CCBN) nodes and their 
segregation from motor CB-BG network (MCBN) nodes is related to cortical network 
GE and segregation in 233 non-related, right-handed participants (Human 
Connectome Project-1200). CCBN GE positively correlated with GE in the default 
mode, motor, and auditory networks and MCBN GE positively correlated with GE in 
all networks, except the default mode and emotional. MCBN segregation was 
related to motor network segregation. These findings highlight the CB-BG 
network's potential role in cortical networks associated with executive 
function, task switching, and verbal working memory. This work has implications 
for understanding cortical network organization and cortical-subcortical 
interactions in healthy adults and may help in determining biomarkers and 
deciphering subcortical differences seen in disease states.

© 2022. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business 
Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s12311-022-01418-z
PMCID: PMC11223677
PMID: 35661099 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Compliance with Ethical Standards: The authors 
declare no conflict of interest. The investigation reported here used data from 
human subjects that are publicly available. All data used here are available 
from the Human Connectome Project. All planned analyses were submitted to the 
Institutional Review Board and were deemed to be exempt from additional 
oversight due to the nature of the dataset. The authors followed all guidelines 
for data access and storage as put forward in the data sharing agreement from 
the Human Connectome Project.


72. J Cogn Neurosci. 2024 Feb 1;36(2):377-393. doi: 10.1162/jocn_a_02091.

Learning Cognitive Flexibility: Neural Substrates of Adapting Switch-Readiness 
to Time-varying Demands.

Sali AW(1), Bejjani C(2), Egner T(2).

Author information:
(1)Wake Forest University, Winston-Salem, NC.
(2)Duke University, Durham, NC.

An individual's readiness to switch tasks (cognitive flexibility) varies over 
time, in part, as the result of reinforcement learning based on the statistical 
structure of the world around them. Consequently, the behavioral cost associated 
with task-switching is smaller in contexts where switching is frequent than 
where it is rare, but the underlying brain mechanisms of this adaptation in 
cognitive flexibility are not well understood. Here, we manipulated the 
likelihood of switches across blocks of trials in a classic cued task-switching 
paradigm while participants underwent fMRI. As anticipated, behavioral switch 
costs decreased as the probability of switching increased, and neural switch 
costs were observed in lateral and medial frontoparietal cortex. To study 
moment-by-moment adjustments in cognitive flexibility at the neural level, we 
first fitted the behavioral RT data with reinforcement learning algorithms and 
then used the resulting trial-wise prediction error estimate as a regressor in a 
model-based fMRI analysis. The results revealed that lateral frontal and 
parietal cortex activity scaled positively with unsigned switch prediction error 
and that there were no brain regions encoding signed (i.e., switch- or 
repeat-specific) prediction error. Taken together, this study documents that 
adjustments in cognitive flexibility to time-varying switch demands are mediated 
by frontoparietal cortex tracking the likelihood of forthcoming task switches.

© 2023 Massachusetts Institute of Technology.

DOI: 10.1162/jocn_a_02091
PMCID: PMC10902878
PMID: 38010299 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


73. J Neurosci. 2006 Feb 1;26(5):1429-38. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3109-05.2006.

Between-task competition and cognitive control in task switching.

Yeung N(1), Nystrom LE, Aronson JA, Cohen JD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, 
Pennsylvania 15213, USA. nyeung@cmu.edu

Cognitive control is required to regulate interactions between brain regions to 
produce effective, purposeful behavior. We used functional magnetic resonance 
imaging to investigate the nature of these interactions and the role of 
prefrontal cortex (PFC) in cognitive control as subjects switched between simple 
face and word categorization tasks. Face and word stimuli were used because 
previous research has shown them to activate distinguishable cortical regions, 
allowing us to measure levels of activity in task-selective brain regions during 
task switching. We found that activity in brain regions selective for the 
currently irrelevant task predicted the behavioral cost associated with 
switching tasks. This finding supports the theory that between-task competition 
is a critical determinant of behavior. Task switching was also associated with 
increased activity in a network of regions implicated in cognitive control, 
including lateral PFC and parietal cortex. Within this network of regions, we 
observed dissociations between task-selective and general purpose mechanisms. 
These findings provide support for theories that propose a control hierarchy 
comprising regions responsible for maintaining task-specific information about 
rules or goals, and regions involved in the coordination of these goals.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3109-05.2006
PMCID: PMC6675498
PMID: 16452666 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Brain Struct Funct. 2022 Mar;227(2):655-672. doi: 10.1007/s00429-021-02312-w. 
Epub 2021 Jun 9.

Fronto-parietal homotopy in resting-state functional connectivity predicts 
task-switching performance.

Vallesi A(1)(2), Visalli A(3), Gracia-Tabuenca Z(4), Tarantino V(5), Capizzi 
M(6), Alcauter S(4), Mantini D(7)(8), Pini L(9).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroscience and Padova Neuroscience Center, University of 
Padova, Via Giustiniani 5, 35128, Padova, Italy. antonino.vallesi@unipd.it.
(2)IRCCS San Camillo Hospital, Venice, Italy. antonino.vallesi@unipd.it.
(3)Department of Neuroscience and Padova Neuroscience Center, University of 
Padova, Via Giustiniani 5, 35128, Padova, Italy.
(4)Instituto de Neurobiología, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, 
Queretaro, Mexico.
(5)Department of Psychology, Educational Science and Human Movement, University 
of Palermo, Palermo, Italy.
(6)Université Paul Valéry Montpellier 3, EPSYLON EA 4556, 34000, Montpellier, 
France.
(7)IRCCS San Camillo Hospital, Venice, Italy.
(8)Research Centre for Motor Control and Neuroplasticity, KU Leuven, Leuven, 
Belgium.
(9)Department of Neuroscience and Padova Neuroscience Center, University of 
Padova, Via Giustiniani 5, 35128, Padova, Italy. lorenzo.pini@unipd.it.

Homotopic functional connectivity reflects the degree of synchrony in 
spontaneous activity between homologous voxels in the two hemispheres. Previous 
studies have associated increased brain homotopy and decreased white matter 
integrity with performance decrements on different cognitive tasks across the 
life-span. Here, we correlated functional homotopy, both at the whole-brain 
level and specifically in fronto-parietal network nodes, with task-switching 
performance in young adults. Cue-to-target intervals (CTI: 300 vs. 1200 ms) were 
manipulated on a trial-by-trial basis to modulate cognitive demands and 
strategic control. We found that mixing costs, a measure of task-set maintenance 
and monitoring, were significantly correlated to homotopy in different nodes of 
the fronto-parietal network depending on CTI. In particular, mixing costs for 
short CTI trials were smaller with lower homotopy in the superior frontal gyrus, 
whereas mixing costs for long CTI trials were smaller with lower homotopy in the 
supramarginal gyrus. These results were specific to the fronto-parietal network, 
as similar voxel-wise analyses within a control language network did not yield 
significant correlations with behavior. These findings extend previous 
literature on the relationship between homotopy and cognitive performance to 
task-switching, and show a dissociable role of homotopy in different 
fronto-parietal nodes depending on task demands.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s00429-021-02312-w
PMCID: PMC8843912
PMID: 34106305 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.


75. Eur J Neurosci. 2023 Mar;57(6):962-980. doi: 10.1111/ejn.15921. Epub 2023 Feb 7.

Temporal dynamics of cognitive flexibility in adolescents with anorexia nervosa: 
A high-density EEG study.

Berchio C(1), Annen LC(1), Bouamoud Y(1), Micali N(1)(2)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Faculty of Medicine, University of Geneva, Geneva, 
Switzerland.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Gynecology and Obstetrics, Faculty of Medicine, 
University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland.
(3)Great Ormond Street Institute of Child Health, University College London, 
London, UK.
(4)Mental Health Services in the Capital Region of Denmark, Eating Disorders 
Research Unit, Psychiatric Centre Ballerup, Ballerup, Denmark.

Impairment in cognitive flexibility is a core symptom of anorexia nervosa (AN) 
and is associated with treatment resistance. Nevertheless, studies on the neural 
basis of cognitive flexibility in adolescent AN are rare. This study aimed to 
investigate brain networks underlying cognitive flexibility in adolescents with 
AN. To address this aim, participants performed a Dimensional Change Card 
Sorting task during high-density electroencephalography (EEG) recording. Anxiety 
was measured with the State-Trait Anxiety Inventory. Data were collected on 22 
girls with AN and 23 controls. Evoked responses were investigated using 
global-spatial analysis. Adolescents with AN showed greater overall accuracy, 
fewer switch trial errors and reduced inverse efficiency switch cost relative to 
controls, although these effects disappeared after adjusting for trait and state 
anxiety. EEG results indicated augmented early visual orienting processing 
(P100) and subsequent impaired attentional mechanisms to task switching (P300b) 
in subjects with AN. During task switching, diminished activations in subjects 
with AN were identified in the posterior cingulate, calcarine sulcus and 
cerebellum, and task repetitions induced diminished activations in a network 
involving the medial prefrontal cortex, and several posterior regions, compared 
with controls. No significant associations were found between measures of 
cognitive flexibility and anxiety in the AN group. Findings of this study 
suggest atypical neural mechanisms underlying cognitive flexibility in 
adolescents with AN. More importantly, our findings suggest that different 
behavioural profiles in AN could relate to differences in anxiety levels. Future 
research should investigate the efficacy of cognitive training to rebalance 
brain networks of cognitive flexibility in AN.

© 2023 The Authors. European Journal of Neuroscience published by Federation of 
European Neuroscience Societies and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/ejn.15921
PMID: 36683346 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Neuropsychologia. 2015 Jan;66:193-203. doi: 
10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2014.10.037. Epub 2014 Nov 14.

Language and task switching in the bilingual brain: Bilinguals are staying, not 
switching, experts.

Weissberger GH(1), Gollan TH(2), Bondi MW(3), Clark LR(1), Wierenga CE(4).

Author information:
(1)San Diego State University/University of California, San Diego, Joint 
Doctoral Program in Clinical Psychology, 6363 Alvarado Ct. #103, San Diego 
92120-4913, United States.
(2)Department of Psychiatry, University of California, San Diego, 9500 Gilman 
Dr., MC: 0603, La Jolla, CA 92093-0603, United States.
(3)VA San Diego Healthcare System, 3350 La Jolla Village Dr., San Diego 92161, 
United States; Department of Psychiatry, University of California, San Diego, 
9500 Gilman Dr., MC: 0603, La Jolla, CA 92093-0603, United States.
(4)VA San Diego Healthcare System, 3350 La Jolla Village Dr., San Diego 92161, 
United States; Department of Psychiatry, University of California, San Diego, 
9500 Gilman Dr., MC: 0603, La Jolla, CA 92093-0603, United States. Electronic 
address: cwierenga@ucsd.edu.

Bilinguals' ability to control which language they speak and to switch between 
languages may rely on neurocognitive mechanisms shared with non-linguistic task 
switching. However, recent studies also reveal some limitations on the extent 
control mechanisms are shared across domains, introducing the possibility that 
some control mechanisms are unique to language. We investigated this hypothesis 
by directly comparing the neural correlates of task switching and language 
switching. Nineteen Spanish-English bilingual university students underwent a 
functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) study employing a hybrid 
(event-related and blocked) design involving both color-shape switching and 
language switching paradigms. We compared the two switching tasks using 
within-subject voxel-wise t-tests for each of three trial types (single trials 
in single blocks, and stay and switch trials in mixed blocks). Comparing trial 
types to baseline in each task revealed widespread activation for single, stay, 
and switch trials in both color-shape and language switching. Direct comparisons 
of each task for each trial type revealed few differences between tasks on 
single and switch trials, but large task differences during stay trials, with 
more widespread activation for the non-linguistic than for the language task. 
Our results confirm previous suggestions of shared mechanisms of switching 
across domains, but also reveal bilinguals have greater efficiency for 
sustaining the inhibition of the non-target language than the non-target task 
when two responses are available. This efficiency of language control might 
arise from bilinguals' need to control interference from the non-target language 
specifically when not switching languages, when speaking in single- or 
mixed-language contexts.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2014.10.037
PMCID: PMC4596720
PMID: 25446970 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


77. PLoS One. 2015 Dec 30;10(12):e0145826. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0145826. 
eCollection 2015.

Task-switching Cost and Intrinsic Functional Connectivity in the Human Brain: 
Toward Understanding Individual Differences in Cognitive Flexibility.

Yin S(1), Wang T(1), Pan W(1), Liu Y(1), Chen A(1).

Author information:
(1)Key laboratory of Cognition and Personality of Ministry of Education, Faculty 
of Psychology, Southwest University, Chongqing, China.

The human ability to flexibly alternate between tasks (i.e., task-switching) 
represents a critical component of cognitive control. Many functional magnetic 
resonance imaging (fMRI) studies have explored the neural basis of the 
task-switching. However, no study to date has examined how individual 
differences in intrinsic functional architecture of the human brain are related 
to that of the task-switching. In the present study, we took 11 task-switching 
relevant areas from a meta-analysis study as the regions of interests (ROIs) and 
estimated their intrinsic functional connectivity (iFC) with the whole brain. 
This procedure was repeated for 32 healthy adults based upon their fMRI scans 
during resting-state (rfMRI) to investigate the correlations between switching 
cost and the iFC strength across these participants. This analysis found that 
switch cost was negatively correlated with a set of iFC involved ROIs including 
left inferior frontal junction, bilateral superior posterior parietal cortex, 
left precuneus, bilateral inferior parietal lobule, right middle frontal gyrus 
and bilateral middle occipital gyrus. These connectivity profiles represent an 
intrinsic functional architecture of task-switching where the left inferior 
frontal junction plays a hub role in this brain-behavior association. These 
findings are highly reproducible in another validation independent sample and 
provide a novel perspective for understanding the neural basis of individual 
differences in task-switching behaviors reflected in the intrinsic architecture 
of the human brain.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0145826
PMCID: PMC4696812
PMID: 26716447 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.


78. Neuroimage. 2004 Jun;22(2):530-40. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2003.12.034.

Attentional systems in target and distractor processing: a combined ERP and fMRI 
study.

Bledowski C(1), Prvulovic D, Goebel R, Zanella FE, Linden DE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Johann Wolfgang Goethe-Universität, Frankfurt, 
Germany.

The interplay of "top-down" and "bottom-up" regulated mechanisms is of 
particular relevance for the rapid (re-)focusing of attention to environmental 
changes. The purpose of the study was to explore the differential contributions 
of frontoparietal attentional networks involved in top-down and stimulus-driven 
processing to the detection of "target" and "distractor" events in a visual 
three-stimulus oddball paradigm. Thirteen healthy subjects underwent separate 
event-related potential (ERP) and whole-brain functional magnetic resonance 
imaging (fMRI) measurements during the oddball task. The targets, which were 
difficult to detect, elicited a classical posterior P3b whereas the distractor 
stimuli were followed by a centro-frontal P3a ERP. The fMRI data showed 
activation of the temporoparietal junction (TPJ) bilaterally and right 
prefrontal cortex associated with both the target and distractor conditions. 
This network has previously been described as an attentional system that is 
predominantly stimulus driven and that responds to rare events. Furthermore, 
target processing produced bilateral perisylvian activity, which has been 
related to the "retrieval mode". Processing of the distractors activated the 
frontal eye fields (FEFs) and bilateral superior parietal cortex, areas engaged 
in attention switching and voluntary allocation of attention. Additional left 
prefrontal activation suggested an involvement of the cortical system for 
working memory encoding. Our results thus demonstrate that distractor and target 
processing engage a common neuronal system for the detection of rare events, but 
also task-specific subsystems related to attention and memory processes.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2003.12.034
PMID: 15193581 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Sci Data. 2024 Jul 20;11(1):809. doi: 10.1038/s41597-024-03636-y.

Cognitive tasks, anatomical MRI, and functional MRI data evaluating the 
construct of self-regulation.

Bissett PG(1), Eisenberg IW(2), Shim S(3), Rios JAH(3), Jones HM(4), Hagen 
MP(5), Enkavi AZ(6), Li JK(3), Mumford JA(3), MacKinnon DP(7), Marsch LA(8), 
Poldrack RA(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Stanford University, Stanford, USA. 
pbissett@stanford.edu.
(2)Credo AI, Credo, USA.
(3)Department of Psychology, Stanford University, Stanford, USA.
(4)Department of Psychology, University of Chicago, Chicago, USA.
(5)Department of Psychology, University of Washington, Washington, USA.
(6)Division of the Humanities and Social Sciences, California Institute of 
Technology, Pasadena, USA.
(7)Department of Psychology, Arizona State University, Los Angeles, USA.
(8)Center for Technology and Behavioral Health, Geisel School of Medicine, 
Dartmouth College, Stanford, USA.

Update of
    bioRxiv. 2023 Sep 29:2023.09.27.559869. doi: 10.1101/2023.09.27.559869.

We describe the following shared data from N = 103 healthy adults who completed 
a broad set of cognitive tasks, surveys, and neuroimaging measurements to 
examine the construct of self-regulation. The neuroimaging acquisition involved 
task-based fMRI, resting state fMRI, and structural MRI. Each subject completed 
the following ten tasks in the scanner across two 90-minute scanning sessions: 
attention network test (ANT), cued task switching, Columbia card task, dot 
pattern expectancy (DPX), delay discounting, simple and motor selective stop 
signal, Stroop, a towers task, and a set of survey questions. The dataset is 
shared openly through the OpenNeuro project, and the dataset is formatted 
according to the Brain Imaging Data Structure (BIDS) standard.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41597-024-03636-y
PMCID: PMC11271451
PMID: 39033226 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.


80. Brain Res Cogn Brain Res. 2000 Sep;10(1-2):189-96. doi: 
10.1016/s0926-6410(00)00016-1.

Modulation of task-related neural activity in task-switching: an fMRI study.

Kimberg DY(1), Aguirre GK, D'Esposito M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA. 
kimberg@mail.med.upenn.edu

Task-switching paradigms, in which subjects are typically asked to switch 
between different S-R mappings, can be considered operationalizations of 
executive control. Such paradigms are therefore potentially useful in 
investigating the neural bases of control functions. Here, we present the 
results of an fMRI study intended to examine two separable components of 
task-switching: preparation, and the residual shift cost identified by Rogers 
and Monsell [13]. In analyses restricted to functionally identified regions of 
interest, we found robust evidence of greater activity for switch trials, 
compared to repeat trials. This pattern was present both at the time of stimulus 
presentation and prior to the switch trial. In analyses of the entire brain, we 
were able to identify one area in the superior parietal lobule that was active 
during switching but was not part of the apparent network of task-related 
regions. We conclude that switch trials are neurally distinct from repeat trials 
in eliciting generally greater neural activity both before and during the 
performance of a trial.

DOI: 10.1016/s0926-6410(00)00016-1
PMID: 10978708 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


81. PLoS Comput Biol. 2015 Jun 12;11(6):e1004331. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1004331. 
eCollection 2015 Jun.

Stochastic Dynamics Underlying Cognitive Stability and Flexibility.

Ueltzhöffer K(1), Armbruster-Genç DJ(1), Fiebach CJ(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Goethe University Frankfurt, Frankfurt am Main, 
Germany; Bernstein Center for Computational Neuroscience, Heidelberg University, 
Mannheim, Germany.
(2)Department of Psychology, Goethe University Frankfurt, Frankfurt am Main, 
Germany; Bernstein Center for Computational Neuroscience, Heidelberg University, 
Mannheim, Germany; Department of Neuroradiology, Heidelberg University, Im 
Neuenheimer Feld, Heidelberg, Germany; Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition 
and Behaviour, Radboud University, Nijmegen, The Netherlands; IDeA Center for 
Individual Development and Adaptive Education, Frankfurt am Main, Germany.

Cognitive stability and flexibility are core functions in the successful pursuit 
of behavioral goals. While there is evidence for a common frontoparietal network 
underlying both functions and for a key role of dopamine in the modulation of 
flexible versus stable behavior, the exact neurocomputational mechanisms 
underlying those executive functions and their adaptation to environmental 
demands are still unclear. In this work we study the neurocomputational 
mechanisms underlying cue based task switching (flexibility) and distractor 
inhibition (stability) in a paradigm specifically designed to probe both 
functions. We develop a physiologically plausible, explicit model of neural 
networks that maintain the currently active task rule in working memory and 
implement the decision process. We simplify the four-choice decision network to 
a nonlinear drift-diffusion process that we canonically derive from a generic 
winner-take-all network model. By fitting our model to the behavioral data of 
individual subjects, we can reproduce their full behavior in terms of decisions 
and reaction time distributions in baseline as well as distractor inhibition and 
switch conditions. Furthermore, we predict the individual hemodynamic response 
timecourse of the rule-representing network and localize it to a frontoparietal 
network including the inferior frontal junction area and the intraparietal 
sulcus, using functional magnetic resonance imaging. This refines the 
understanding of task-switch-related frontoparietal brain activity as reflecting 
attractor-like working memory representations of task rules. Finally, we 
estimate the subject-specific stability of the rule-representing attractor 
states in terms of the minimal action associated with a transition between 
different rule states in the phase-space of the fitted models. This stability 
measure correlates with switching-specific thalamocorticostriatal activation, 
i.e., with a system associated with flexible working memory updating and 
dopaminergic modulation of cognitive flexibility. These results show that 
stochastic dynamical systems can implement the basic computations underlying 
cognitive stability and flexibility and explain neurobiological bases of 
individual differences.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1004331
PMCID: PMC4466596
PMID: 26068119 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.


82. Neuropsychol Rev. 2021 Mar;31(1):139-166. doi: 10.1007/s11065-020-09455-3. Epub 
2020 Sep 22.

A Systematic Review of the Application of Functional Near-Infrared Spectroscopy 
to the Study of Cerebral Hemodynamics in Healthy Aging.

Yeung MK(1), Chan AS(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Rehabilitation Sciences, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, 
Hung Hom, Hong Kong, SAR, China. kcmyeung@polyu.edu.hk.
(2)Neuropsychology Laboratory, Department of Psychology, The Chinese University 
of Hong Kong, Shatin, N.T, Hong Kong, SAR, China. aschan@psy.cuhk.edu.hk.
(3)Chanwuyi Research Center for Neuropsychological Well-being, The Chinese 
University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, SAR, China. aschan@psy.cuhk.edu.hk.

Positron emission tomography (PET) and functional magnetic resonance imaging 
(fMRI) studies have shown that healthy aging is associated with functional brain 
deterioration that preferentially affects the prefrontal cortex. This article 
reviews the application of an alternative method, functional near-infrared 
spectroscopy (fNIRS), to the study of age-related changes in cerebral 
hemodynamics and factors that influence cerebral hemodynamics in the elderly 
population. We conducted literature searches in PudMed and PsycINFO, and 
selected only English original research articles that used fNIRS to study 
healthy individuals with a mean age of ≥ 55 years. All articles were published 
in peer-reviewed journals between 1977 and May 2019. We synthesized 114 fNIRS 
studies examining hemodynamic changes that occurred in the resting state and 
during the tasks of sensation and perception, motor control, semantic 
processing, word retrieval, attentional shifting, inhibitory control, memory, 
and emotion and motivation in healthy older adults. This review, which was not 
registered in a registry, reveals an age-related reduction in resting-state 
cerebral oxygenation and connectivity in the prefrontal cortex. It also shows 
that aging is associated with a reduction in functional hemispheric asymmetry 
and increased compensatory activity in the frontal lobe across multiple task 
domains. In addition, this article describes the beneficial effects of healthy 
lifestyles and the detrimental effects of cardiovascular disease risk factors on 
brain functioning among nondemented older adults. Limitations of this review 
include exclusion of gray and non-English literature and lack of meta-analysis. 
Altogether, the fNIRS literature provides some support for various 
neurocognitive aging theories derived from task-based PET and fMRI studies. 
Because fNIRS is relatively motion-tolerant and environmentally unconstrained, 
it is a promising tool for fostering the development of aging biomarkers and 
antiaging interventions.

DOI: 10.1007/s11065-020-09455-3
PMID: 32959167 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Cereb Cortex. 2006 Dec;16(12):1679-89. doi: 10.1093/cercor/bhj116. Epub 2006 Jan 
25.

Fractionating attentional control using event-related fMRI.

Hampshire A(1), Owen AM.

Author information:
(1)Medical Research Council Cognition & Brain Sciences Unit, Cambridge, UK. 
Adam.Hampshire@mrc-cbu.cam.ac.uk

Despite numerous functional neuroimaging and lesion studies of human executive 
function, the precise neuroanatomical correlates of specific components of 
attentional control remain controversial. Using a novel approach that focused 
upon volunteer behavior rather than experimental manipulations, specific 
components of attentional shifting were fractionated, and their neural 
correlates differentiated using event-related fMRI. The results demonstrate that 
the ventrolateral prefrontal cortex is involved in switching attention "between" 
stimulus dimensions, whereas the posterior parietal cortex mediates changes in 
stimulus-response mapping. Furthermore, reversals based on negative feedback 
activated the lateral orbitofrontal cortex, whereas positive feedback modulated 
activity in the medial orbital frontal cortex. Finally, the dorsolateral 
prefrontal cortex was active throughout solution search. These findings support 
the hypothesis that lateral prefrontal, orbital, and parietal areas form a 
supervisory network that controls the focus of attention and suggests that these 
regions can be fractionated in terms of their specific contributions.

DOI: 10.1093/cercor/bhj116
PMID: 16436686 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Neurodegener Dis. 2022;22(1):24-28. doi: 10.1159/000526778. Epub 2022 Sep 6.

Frontostriatal Circuits Alterations Associated with Cognitive Flexibility 
Deterioration in Huntington's Disease.

Padron-Rivera G(1), Romero-Molina AO(2), Diaz R(2), Vaca-Palomares I(3), 
Ochoa-Morales A(4), Romero-Rebollar C(5), Chirino-Pérez A(2), Fernandez-Ruiz 
J(2).

Author information:
(1)Neuropsychology Laboratory, Department of Physiology, Faculty of Medicine, 
National Autonomous University of Mexico, Mexico City, Mexico, 
gpr1702@gmail.com.
(2)Neuropsychology Laboratory, Department of Physiology, Faculty of Medicine, 
National Autonomous University of Mexico, Mexico City, Mexico.
(3)Cognitive and Behavioral Sciences, Faculty of Psychology, National Autonomous 
University of Mexico, Mexico City, Mexico.
(4)Department of Neurogenetics, National Institute of Neurology and Neurosurgery 
Manuel Velasco Suárez, Mexico City, Mexico.
(5)Department of Health Sciences, Lerma Metropolitan Autonomous University, 
Mexico City, Mexico.

BACKGROUND: Recent resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging studies 
have reported abnormal functional connectivity (FC) in the prefrontal cortex 
(PFC)-striatum circuit in patients with premanifest Huntington's disease (HD). 
However, there is a lack of evidence showing persistence of abnormal 
frontostriatal FC and its relation to cognitive flexibility performance in 
patients with clinically manifest HD.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to evaluate the resting-state FC integrity 
of the frontostriatal circuit and its relation to cognitive flexibility in HD 
patients and healthy controls (HCs).
METHOD: Eighteen patients with early clinical HD manifestation and 18 HCs 
matched for age, sex, and education participated in this study. Both groups 
performed the Cambridge Neuropsychological Test Automated Battery (CANTAB) 
Intra-Extra Dimensional (IED) set-shift task, which measures cognitive 
flexibility. Resting-state functional magnetic resonance images were also 
acquired to examine the FC in specific frontostriatal circuits. Eight regions of 
interest were preselected based on regions previously associated with 
extradimensional (ED) shifting in patients with premanifest HD.
RESULTS: Significant negative correlations between the number of attentional 
set-shifting errors and the ventral striatum-ventrolateral PFC FC were found in 
the HD group. This group also showed negative FC correlations between the total 
errors and the FC between right ventral striatum-right ventrolateral PFC, left 
ventral striatum-left ventrolateral PFC, and right ventral striatum-left 
ventrolateral PFC. Negative correlations between the ED errors and left ventral 
striatum-left ventrolateral PFC and right ventral striatum-right ventrolateral 
PFC FC were also found. Finally, a positive correlation between the number of 
stages completed and left ventral striatum-left ventrolateral PFC FC was found.
CONCLUSIONS: Manifest HD patients show significant cognitive flexibility 
deficits in attentional set-shifting that are associated with FC alterations in 
the frontostriatal circuit. These results show that FC abnormalities found in 
the prodromal stage of the disease can also be associated with cognitive 
flexibility deficits at a later clinical stage, making them good candidates to 
be explored in longitudinal studies.

© 2022 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000526778
PMID: 36067733 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


85. J Cogn Neurosci. 2010 Jan;22(1):32-47. doi: 10.1162/jocn.2009.21194.

Discrete object representation, attention switching, and task difficulty in the 
parietal lobe.

Cusack R(1), Mitchell DJ, Duncan J.

Author information:
(1)MRC Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit, Cambridge, UK. 
rhodri.cusack@mrc-cbu.cam.ac.uk

An important component of perception, attention, and memory is the structuring 
of information into subsets ("objects"), which allows some parts to be 
considered together but kept separate from others. Portions of the posterior 
parietal lobe respond proportionally to the number of objects in the scope of 
attention and short-term memory, up to a capacity limit of around four, 
suggesting they have a role in this important process. This study investigates 
the relationship of discrete object representation to other parietal functions. 
Two experiments and two supplementary analyses were conducted to evaluate 
responsivity in parietal regions to the number of objects, the number of spatial 
locations, attention switching, and general task difficulty. Using transparent 
motion, it was found that a posterior and inferior parietal response to multiple 
objects persists even in the absence of a change in visual extent or the number 
of spatial locations. In a monitoring task, it was found that attention 
switching (or task difficulty) and object representation have distinct neural 
signatures, with the former showing greater recruitment of an anterior and 
lateral intraparietal sulcus (IPS) region, but the latter in a posterior and 
lateral region. A dissociation was also seen between selectivity for object load 
across tasks in the inferior IPS and feature or object-related memory load in 
the superior IPS.

DOI: 10.1162/jocn.2009.21194
PMID: 19199425 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


86. J Neuropsychiatry Clin Neurosci. 2018 Fall;30(4):318-324. doi: 
10.1176/appi.neuropsych.18030038. Epub 2018 Aug 24.

An fMRI Pilot Study of Cognitive Flexibility in Trichotillomania.

Grant JE(1), Daws R(1), Hampshire A(1), Chamberlain SR(1).

Author information:
(1)From the Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Neuroscience, University of 
Chicago (JEG); the Department of Medicine, Computational, Cognitive, and 
Clinical Neuroimaging Lab, Imperial College, London (RD, AH); the Department of 
Psychiatry, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom (SRC); and 
Cambridge and Peterborough NHS Foundation Trust, London (SRC).

Trichotillomania is a relatively common psychiatric condition, although its 
neurobiological basis is unknown. Abnormalities of flexible responding have been 
implicated in the pathophysiology of obsessive-compulsive disorder and thus may 
be relevant in trichotillomania. The purpose of this study was to probe reversal 
learning and attentional set-shifting in trichotillomania. Twelve adults with 
trichotillomania and 13 matched healthy control subjects undertook a functional 
MRI task of cognitive flexibility. Group-level activation maps for 
extradimensional and reversal switches were independently parcellated into 
discrete regions of interest using a custom watershed algorithm. Activation 
magnitudes were extracted from each region of interest and study subject and 
compared at the group level. Reversal events evoked the expected patterns of 
insula and parietal regions and activity in the frontal dorsal cortex extending 
anterior to the frontal poles, whereas extradimensional shifts evoked the 
expected frontal dorsolateral and parietal pattern of activity. Trichotillomania 
was associated with significantly increased right middle frontal and reduced 
right occipital cortex activation during reversal and set-shifting. Elevated 
frontal activation coupled with reduced activation in more posterior brain 
regions was identified. These pilot data suggest potentially important neural 
dysfunction associated with trichotillomania.

DOI: 10.1176/appi.neuropsych.18030038
PMCID: PMC6276993
PMID: 30141727 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Potential Conflicts of Interest: Dr. Chamberlain 
consults for Cambridge Cognition and Shire. Dr. Grant is chair of the Scientific 
Advisory Board of the TLC Foundation for BFRBs and currently receives funding 
from its BFRB Precision Medicine Initiative. In addition, he has received 
research grants from NIAAA, American Foundation for Suicide Prevention, National 
Center for Responsible Gaming, and Takeda Pharmaceuticals. He receives yearly 
compensation from Springer Publishing for acting as Editor-in-Chief of the 
Journal of Gambling Studies and has received royalties from Oxford University 
Press, American Psychiatric Publishing, Inc., Norton Press, and McGraw Hill. Mr 
Daws and Dr. Hampshire report no potential conflicts of interest.


87. PLoS Comput Biol. 2022 Sep 12;18(9):e1010500. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1010500. 
eCollection 2022 Sep.

Thalamic regulation of frontal interactions in human cognitive flexibility.

Hummos A(1)(2), Wang BA(3)(4), Drammis S(1)(2)(5), Halassa MM(1)(2), Pleger 
B(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)McGovern Institute for Brain Research, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 
Cambridge, Massachusetts, United States of America.
(2)Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts, United States of America.
(3)Department of Neurology, BG University Hospital Bergmannsheil, 
Ruhr-University Bochum, Bochum, Germany.
(4)Collaborative Research Centre 874 "Integration and Representation of Sensory 
Processes", Ruhr University Bochum, Bochum, Germany.
(5)Computer Science & Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, Massachusetts 
Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts, United States of America.

Interactions across frontal cortex are critical for cognition. Animal studies 
suggest a role for mediodorsal thalamus (MD) in these interactions, but the 
computations performed and direct relevance to human decision making are 
unclear. Here, inspired by animal work, we extended a neural model of an 
executive frontal-MD network and trained it on a human decision-making task for 
which neuroimaging data were collected. Using a biologically-plausible learning 
rule, we found that the model MD thalamus compressed its cortical inputs 
(dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, dlPFC) underlying stimulus-response 
representations. Through direct feedback to dlPFC, this thalamic operation 
efficiently partitioned cortical activity patterns and enhanced task switching 
across different contingencies. To account for interactions with other frontal 
regions, we expanded the model to compute higher-order strategy signals outside 
dlPFC, and found that the MD offered a more efficient route for such signals to 
switch dlPFC activity patterns. Human fMRI data provided evidence that the MD 
engaged in feedback to dlPFC, and had a role in routing orbitofrontal cortex 
inputs when subjects switched behavioral strategy. Collectively, our findings 
contribute to the emerging evidence for thalamic regulation of frontal 
interactions in the human brain.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1010500
PMCID: PMC9499289
PMID: 36094955 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.


88. Cereb Cortex. 2021 Oct 22;31(12):5549-5559. doi: 10.1093/cercor/bhab178.

Aberrant Claustrum Microstructure in Humans after Premature Birth.

Hedderich DM(1), Menegaux A(1), Li H(2), Schmitz-Koep B(1), Stämpfli P(3), Bäuml 
JG(1), Berndt MT(1), Bäuerlein FJB(4), Grothe MJ(5)(6), Dyrba M(5), Avram 
M(1)(7), Boecker H(8), Daamen M(8)(9), Zimmer C(1), Bartmann P(9), Wolke 
D(10)(11), Sorg C(1)(12).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroradiology, School of Medicine, Klinikum rechts der Isar, 
Technical University of Munich, 81675 Munich, Germany.
(2)Department of Informatics, Technical University of Munich, 85748 Garching, 
Germany.
(3)MR-Center of the Psychiatric Hospital and the Department of Child and 
Adolescent Psychiatry, University of Zurich, 8032 Zurich, Switzerland.
(4)Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Department of Molecular Structural 
Biology, 82152 Martinsried, Germany.
(5)German Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases (DZNE), Site Rostock/Greifswald, 
18147 Rostock, Germany.
(6)Unidad de Trastornos del Movimiento, Servicio de Neurología y Neurofisiología 
Clínica, Instituto de Biomedicina de Sevilla, Hospital Universitario Virgen del 
Rocío/CSIC/Universidad de Sevilla, 41013 Sevilla, Spain.
(7)Department of Psychiatry, Psychosomatics and Psychotherapy, Schleswig 
Holstein University Hospital, University Lübeck, 23538 Lübeck, Germany.
(8)Functional Neuroimaging Group, Department of Diagnostic and Interventional 
Radiology, University Hospital Bonn, 53127 Bonn, Germany.
(9)Department of Neonatology, University Hospital Bonn, 53127 Bonn, Germany.
(10)Department of Psychology, University of Warwick, CV4 7AL, Coventry, UK.
(11)Warwick Medical School, University of Warwick, CV4 7AL, Coventry, UK.
(12)Department of Psychiatry, School of Medicine, Klinikum rechts der Isar, 
Technical University of Munich, 81675 Munich, Germany.

Several observations suggest an impact of prematurity on the claustrum. First, 
the claustrum's development appears to depend on transient subplate neurons of 
intra-uterine brain development, which are affected by prematurity. Second, the 
claustrum is the most densely connected region of the mammalian forebrain 
relative to its volume; due to its effect on pre-oligodendrocytes, prematurity 
impacts white matter connections and thereby the development of sources and 
targets of such connections, potentially including the claustrum. Third, due to 
its high connection degree, the claustrum contributes to general cognitive 
functioning (e.g., selective attention and task switching/maintaining); general 
cognitive functioning, however, is at risk in prematurity. Thus, we hypothesized 
altered claustrum structure after premature birth, with these alterations being 
associated with impaired general cognitive performance in premature born 
persons. Using T1-weighted and diffusion-weighted magnetic resonance imaging in 
70 very preterm/very low-birth-weight (VP/VLBW) born adults and 87 term-born 
adults, we found specifically increased mean diffusivity in the claustrum of 
VP/VLBW adults, associated both with low birth weight and at-trend with reduced 
IQ. This result demonstrates altered claustrum microstructure after premature 
birth. Data suggest aberrant claustrum development, which is potentially related 
with aberrant subplate neuron and forebrain connection development of 
prematurity.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. 
For permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/cercor/bhab178
PMID: 34171095 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Brain Res. 2008 Apr 8;1203:116-25. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2008.01.092. Epub 
2008 Feb 13.

Electrophysiological correlates of task conflicts in task-switching.

Hsieh S(1), Liu H.

Author information:
(1)Cognitive Electrophysiology Laboratory, Department of Psychology, National 
Chung Cheng University, Taiwan. psyhsl@ccu.edu.tw

The current study investigated how stimulus-induced task conflicts influence 
task-switching, and how this effect modulates the post-stimulus switch-related 
event-related potentials (ERPs). In most task-switching paradigms, the stimulus 
display comprises a target and a distractor, which together can cause task 
conflicts when each is associated with a different task-set. To avoid 
performance interference due to task conflicts, it may be necessary to suppress 
inappropriately activated responses afforded by the irrelevant stimulus 
(Stimulus-Response (S-R) inhibition), or the entire irrelevant task-set 
(task-set inhibition) in response to contextual changes. The current study 
employed a pair-wise task-switching paradigm, in which task-switching and repeat 
trials were compared among three stimulus conditions-neutral, congruent, and 
incongruent-to distinguish the two types of inhibition. The results of the 
current study showed that both mean response time (RT) and the P3b effect were 
modulated by the stimulus condition, and reliably differed in both the congruent 
and incongruent stimulus conditions from the neutral stimulus conditions. Thus, 
the electrophysiological results of the current study suggest that the P3b 
component involves inhibitory processes to overcome stimulus-induced task 
conflicts at the level of the entire irrelevant task-set in task-switching.

DOI: 10.1016/j.brainres.2008.01.092
PMID: 18314093 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Neuropsychology. 2010 Jul;24(4):413-23. doi: 10.1037/a0018997.

Differential brain activation patterns in adult attention-deficit hyperactivity 
disorder (ADHD) associated with task switching.

Dibbets P(1), Evers EA, Hurks PP, Bakker K, Jolles J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Psychological Science, Faculty of Psychology and 
Neuroscience, Maastricht University, the Netherlands. 
Pauline.Dibbets@maastrichtuniversity.nl

OBJECTIVE: The main aim of the study was to examine blood oxygen level-dependent 
response during task switching in adults with attention-deficit/hyperactivity 
disorder (ADHD).
METHOD: Fifteen male adults with ADHD and 14 controls participated and performed 
a task-switching paradigm.
RESULTS: Behaviorally, no specific executive control problems were observed in 
the ADHD participants, although they did display more errors in general. The 
neuroimaging data did show remarkable differences between the ADHD and control 
adults: Adults with ADHD engaged more strongly the dorsal anterior cingulate 
cortex, middle temporal gyrus, precuneus, lingual gyrus, precentral gyrus, and 
insula than did the healthy controls during task switching. Controls displayed 
more task-related activity in the putamen, posterior cingulate gyrus, medial 
frontal gyrus, thalamus, orbitofrontal cortex, and postcentral gyrus.
CONCLUSIONS: ADHD adults did not display specific executive control problems at 
a behavioral level, but did engage different brain areas during task switching 
compared with healthy controls. The results are discussed in the framework of 
the executive frontostriatal circuitry, conflict detection, and attentional 
networks.

DOI: 10.1037/a0018997
PMID: 20604616 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Brain Connect. 2023 Mar;13(2):97-106. doi: 10.1089/brain.2021.0193. Epub 2022 
Sep 27.

Enhanced Dorsal Attention Network to Salience Network Interaction in Video 
Gamers During Sensorimotor Decision-Making Tasks.

Jordan T(1), Dhamala M(1)(2)(3)(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physics and Astronomy, Georgia State University, Atlanta, 
Georgia, USA.
(2)Neuroscience Institute, Georgia State University, Atlanta, Georgia, USA.
(3)Department of Mathematics and Statistics, Georgia State University, Atlanta, 
Georgia, USA.
(4)Center for Behavioral Neuroscience, Center for Diagnostics and Therapeutics, 
Georgia State University, Atlanta, Georgia, USA.
(5)Tri-Institutional Center for Translational Research in Neuroimaging and Data 
Science (TReNDS), Georgia State University, Georgia Institute of Technology, and 
Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia, USA.

Introduction: Video game playing is most often a perceptually and cognitively 
engaging activity. Players enter into sensory-rich competitive environments, 
which require them to go from trivial tasks to making active decisions 
repeatedly and could lend themselves to improve sensorimotor decision-making 
capabilities. Since video game playing requires moment-to-moment switching of 
attention from one aspect of sensory information and task to another, enhanced 
attention control and attention-switching mechanism in the brain can be thought 
as the neural basis for such improvements. Previous studies have suggested that 
attention switching is mediated by the salience network (SN). However, how SN 
interacts with the dorsal attention network (DAN) in active decision-making 
tasks and whether video game playing modulates these networks remain to be 
investigated. Methods: Using a modified version of the left-right moving dot 
motion task in a functional magnetic resonance imaging experiment, we examined 
the decision response times (dRTs) and functional interactions within and 
between SN and DAN for video game players (VGPs) and nonvideo game players 
(NVGPs). Results: We found that VGPs had lower response times for all task 
conditions and higher decision accuracy for a medium speed setting of moving 
dots. Associated with this improved task performance in VGPs compared with NVGPs 
was an increase in DAN to SN connectivity. This SN-DAN connectivity was 
negatively correlated with dRT. Discussion: These results suggest that enhanced 
influence of DAN over SN is the brain basis for improved sensorimotor 
decision-making performance as a result of engaging long term in cognitively 
challenging and attention-demanding activities such as video game playing. 
Impact statement Being able to flexibly direct attention is a key factor in 
sensorimotor decision-making. Video game playing, an attentionally and 
cognitively engaging activity, can have a beneficial effect on attention and 
decision-making. Through this study, we examined whether video game players 
(VGPs) have improved decision-making skills and investigated the brain basis for 
improvements in a functional magnetic resonance imaging experiment. Brain 
connectivity from dorsal attention network regions to salience network regions 
was higher in VGPs and negatively correlated with decision response time for 
both groups. These results suggest that video game playing can enhance the 
top-down interaction to improve sensorimotor decision-making.

DOI: 10.1089/brain.2021.0193
PMID: 36053714 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


92. PLoS One. 2012;7(6):e38498. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0038498. Epub 2012 Jun 7.

Attentional set-shifting deficit in Parkinson's disease is associated with 
prefrontal dysfunction: an FDG-PET study.

Sawada Y(1), Nishio Y, Suzuki K, Hirayama K, Takeda A, Hosokai Y, Ishioka T, 
Itoyama Y, Takahashi S, Fukuda H, Mori E.

Author information:
(1)Department of Behavioral Neurology and Cognitive Neuroscience, Tohoku 
University Graduate School of Medicine, Sendai, Japan.

The attentional set-shifting deficit that has been observed in Parkinson's 
disease (PD) has long been considered neuropsychological evidence of the 
involvement of meso-prefrontal and prefrontal-striatal circuits in cognitive 
flexibility. However, recent studies have suggested that non-dopaminergic, 
posterior cortical pathologies may also contribute to this deficit. Although 
several neuroimaging studies have addressed this issue, the results of these 
studies were confounded by the use of tasks that required other cognitive 
processes in addition to set-shifting, such as rule learning and working memory. 
In this study, we attempted to identify the neural correlates of the attentional 
set-shifting deficit in PD using a compound letter task and 
18F-fluoro-deoxy-glucose (FDG) positron emission tomography during rest. Shift 
cost, which is a measure of attentional set-shifting ability, was significantly 
correlated with hypometabolism in the right dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, 
including the putative human frontal eye field. Our results provide direct 
evidence that dysfunction in the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex makes a primary 
contribution to the attentional set-shifting deficit that has been observed in 
PD patients.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0038498
PMCID: PMC3369918
PMID: 22685575 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.


93. bioRxiv [Preprint]. 2023 Sep 29:2023.09.27.559869. doi: 
10.1101/2023.09.27.559869.

Cognitive tasks, anatomical MRI, and functional MRI data evaluating the 
construct of self-regulation.

Bissett PG(1), Eisenberg IW(2), Shim S(1), Rios JAH(1), Jones HM(3), Hagen 
MP(4), Enkavi AZ(5), Li JK(1), Mumford JA(1), MacKinnon DP(6), Marsch LA(7), 
Poldrack RA(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Stanford University.
(2)Credo AI.
(3)Department of Psychology, University of Chicago.
(4)Department of Psychology, University of Washington.
(5)Division of the Humanities and Social Sciences, California Institute of 
Technology.
(6)Department of Psychology, Arizona State University.
(7)Center for Technology and Behavioral Health, Geisel School of Medicine, 
Dartmouth College.

Update in
    Sci Data. 2024 Jul 20;11(1):809. doi: 10.1038/s41597-024-03636-y.

We describe the following shared data from N=103 healthy adults who completed a 
broad set cognitive tasks, surveys, and neuroimaging measurements to examine the 
construct of self-regulation. The neuroimaging acquisition involved task-based 
fMRI, resting fMRI, and structural MRI. Each subject completed the following ten 
tasks in the scanner across two 90-minute scanning sessions: attention network 
test (ANT), cued task switching, Columbia card task, dot pattern expectancy 
(DPX), delay discounting, simple and motor selective stop signal, Stroop, a 
towers task, and a set of survey questions. Subjects also completed resting 
state scans. The dataset is shared openly through the OpenNeuro project, and the 
dataset is formatted according to the Brain Imaging Data Structure (BIDS) 
standard.

DOI: 10.1101/2023.09.27.559869
PMCID: PMC10557703
PMID: 37808748

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests The authors declare no 
competing interests.


94. Front Aging Neurosci. 2018 Sep 24;10:280. doi: 10.3389/fnagi.2018.00280. 
eCollection 2018.

Task-Switching Performance Improvements After Tai Chi Chuan Training Are 
Associated With Greater Prefrontal Activation in Older Adults.

Wu MT(1)(2), Tang PF(1)(3)(4)(5)(6), Goh JOS(3)(5)(6)(7), Chou TL(3)(5)(7), 
Chang YK(8), Hsu YC(9), Chen YJ(9), Chen NC(3), Tseng WI(3)(5)(9), Gau 
SS(3)(5)(7)(10), Chiu MJ(3)(5)(7)(11), Lan C(4).

Author information:
(1)School and Graduate Institute of Physical Therapy, College of Medicine, 
National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan.
(2)Yonghe Cardinal Tien Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan.
(3)Graduate Institute of Brain and Mind Sciences, College of Medicine, National 
Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan.
(4)Department of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, National Taiwan 
University Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan.
(5)Neurobiology and Cognitive Science Center, National Taiwan University, 
Taipei, Taiwan.
(6)Center for Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, National Taiwan University, 
Taipei, Taiwan.
(7)Department of Psychology, College of Science, National Taiwan University, 
Taipei, Taiwan.
(8)Department of Physical Education, National Taiwan Normal University, Taipei, 
Taiwan.
(9)Institute of Medical Device and Imaging, College of Medicine, National Taiwan 
University, Taipei, Taiwan.
(10)Department of Psychiatry, National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei, 
Taiwan.
(11)Department of Neurology, National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei, 
Taiwan.

Studies have shown that Tai Chi Chuan (TCC) training has benefits on 
task-switching ability. However, the neural correlates underlying the effects of 
TCC training on task-switching ability remain unclear. Using task-related 
functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) with a numerical Stroop paradigm, 
we investigated changes of prefrontal brain activation and behavioral 
performance during task-switching before and after TCC training and examined the 
relationships between changes in brain activation and task-switching behavioral 
performance. Cognitively normal older adults were randomly assigned to either 
the TCC or control (CON) group. Over a 12-week period, the TCC group received 
three 60-min sessions of Yang-style TCC training weekly, whereas the CON group 
only received one telephone consultation biweekly and did not alter their life 
style. All participants underwent assessments of physical functions and 
neuropsychological functions of task-switching, and fMRI scans, before and after 
the intervention. Twenty-six (TCC, N = 16; CON, N = 10) participants completed 
the entire experimental procedure. We found significant group by time 
interaction effects on behavioral and brain activation measures. Specifically, 
the TCC group showed improved physical function, decreased errors on 
task-switching performance, and increased left superior frontal activation for 
Switch > Non-switch contrast from pre- to post-intervention, that were not seen 
in the CON group. Intriguingly, TCC participants with greater prefrontal 
activation increases in the switch condition from pre- to post-intervention 
presented greater reductions in task-switching errors. These findings suggest 
that TCC training could potentially provide benefits to some, although not all, 
older adults to enhance the function of their prefrontal activations during 
task-switching.

DOI: 10.3389/fnagi.2018.00280
PMCID: PMC6165861
PMID: 30319391


95. J Neurosci. 2025 Jun 25;45(26):e2358232025. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2358-23.2025.

Task-Switch Related Reductions in Neural Distinctiveness in Children and Adults: 
Commonalities and Differences.

Schwarze SA(1), Bonati S(2), Cichy RM(3), Lindenberger U(2)(4), Bunge SA(5), 
Fandakova Y(1)(6).

Author information:
(1)Center for Lifespan Psychology, Max Planck Institute for Human Development, 
Berlin 14195, Germany schwarze@mpib-berlin.mpg.de fandakova@uni-trier.de.
(2)Center for Lifespan Psychology, Max Planck Institute for Human Development, 
Berlin 14195, Germany.
(3)Department of Education and Psychology, Freie Universität Berlin, Berlin 
14195, Germany.
(4)Max Planck UCL Centre for Computational Psychiatry and Ageing Research, 
Berlin 14195, Germany and London WC1B 5EH, United Kingdom.
(5)Department of Psychology and Helen Wills Neuroscience Institute, University 
of California at Berkeley, Berkeley, California 94720-1650.
(6)Department of Psychology and Institute for Cognitive and Affective 
Neuroscience, University of Trier, Trier 54296, Germany.

Goal-directed behavior requires the ability to flexibly switch between task sets 
with changing environmental demands. Switching between tasks generally comes at 
the cost of slower and less accurate responses. Compared with adults, children 
often show greater switch costs, presumably reflecting the protracted 
development of the ability to flexibly update task-set representations. To test 
whether the distinctiveness of neural task-set representations is more strongly 
affected by a task switch in children compared with adults, we examined 
multivoxel patterns of fMRI activation in 88 children (8-11 years, 49 girls, 39 
boys) and 52 adults (20-30 years, 27 women, 25 men) during a task-switching 
paradigm. Using multivariate pattern analysis (MVPA), we investigated whether 
task-set representations were less distinct on switch than on repeat trials 
across frontoparietal, cingulo-opercular, and temporo-occipital regions. 
Children and adults showed lower accuracy and longer response times on switch 
than on repeat trials. Switch costs were similar across groups. Decoding 
accuracy was lower on switch than repeat trials, suggesting that switching 
reduces the distinctiveness of task-set representations. Reliable age 
differences in switch-related reductions of decoding accuracy were absent. More 
nuanced analyses using probability measures indicated that the distinctiveness 
of task sets was more affected by switch demand in children than in adults in a 
subset of frontal, cingulate, and temporal regions. These results point to a 
remarkable degree of maturity of neural representations of task-relevant 
information in late childhood along with more subtle region-specific age 
differences in the effects of task switching on rule representation.

Copyright © 2025 the authors.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2358-23.2025
PMCID: PMC12199546
PMID: 40368604 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interests.


96. Neuropsychologia. 2009 Mar;47(4):1160-72. doi: 
10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2009.01.014.

Updating sensory versus task representations during task-switching: insights 
from cognitive brain potentials in humans.

Periáñez JA(1), Barceló F.

Author information:
(1)Institut Universitari d'Investigació en Ciències de la Salut, Universitat de 
les Illes Balears, 07122 Palma de Mallorca, Spain.

Task-cueing studies suggest that the updating of sensory and task 
representations both contribute to behavioral task-switch costs [Forstmann, B. 
U., Brass, M., & Koch, I. (2007). Methodological and empirical issues when 
dissociating cue-related from task-related processes in the explicit task-cuing 
procedure. Psychological Research, 71(4), 393-400]. Here we used transition cues 
to orthogonally manipulate Cue- and Task updating (switches vs. repetitions), in 
order to identify distinct behavioral indicators and event-related potentials 
(ERPs) associated with the exogenous and endogenous control of task preparation 
and execution. Both Cue- and Task updating, as well as their interaction, 
yielded significant behavioral costs, and evoked distinct cue- and target-locked 
ERPs. Task-switches enhanced cue-locked early P3 amplitudes (180-220 ms) over 
mid-central scalp regions, whereas cue switches reduced a fronto-central 
negativity (N2; 255-295 ms). In contrast, both cue- and task-switches enhanced 
cue-locked late P3 amplitudes (300-340 ms; novelty P3) over centro-parietal 
regions, supporting the hypothesis of a common neural substrate for processing 
stimulus and task novelty [Barceló, F., Escera, C., Corral, M. J., & Perianez, 
J. A. (2006). Task switching and novelty processing activate a common neural 
network for cognitive control. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 18(10), 
1734-1748]. In the target period, both cue- and task-switches reduced target P3 
activity (310-730 ms) with short cue-target intervals only, suggesting that 
behavioral switch costs reflect the accrual of various time-dependent control 
operations during task preparation and execution. We conclude that the cognitive 
control of task-switching seems to emerge from a dynamic interplay between 
exogenous and endogenous sources of information.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2009.01.014
PMID: 19350711 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Cortex. 2019 Oct;119:470-479. doi: 10.1016/j.cortex.2019.08.001. Epub 2019 Aug 
12.

Neural adaptation and cognitive inflexibility in repeated problem-solving 
behaviors.

Huang F(1), Han L(2), Jiang Y(3), Li F(3), Luo J(4).

Author information:
(1)School of Psychology, Jiangxi Normal University, Nanchang, China. Electronic 
address: huangfr@jxnu.edu.cn.
(2)School of Psychology, Shandong Normal University, Jinan, China.
(3)School of Psychology, Jiangxi Normal University, Nanchang, China.
(4)Beijing Key Laboratory of Learning & Cognition, School of Psychology, Capital 
Normal University, Beijing, China. Electronic address: luoj@psych.ac.cn.

Repeated stimulus processing is often associated with a reduction in neural 
activity, known as neural adaptation. Therefore, people are more sensitive to 
novelty detection but likely lose flexibility in subsequent novelty processing 
after detection. To demonstrate the dynamic changes in neural adaption in 
repeated problem-solving behaviors and test its negative influence on subsequent 
nonrepetitive problem-solving behaviors, we adopted a Chinese character 
decomposition task in this fMRI study. Participants were asked to repeatedly 
perform 3-5 practice problems that could be solved by the same loose chunk 
decomposition (LCD) solution followed by a test problem that could be solved by 
a tight chunk decomposition (TCD) solution in the enhanced-set condition. The 
practice problem gradually elicited lower percent signal changes within the 
cuneus, superior parietal lobule (SPL), inferior frontal gyrus (IFG) and medial 
prefrontal cortex (mPFC) in serial positions -1, -2 and -3 of a set, implying 
that neural adaptation occurred in repeated practice. Both the test problem and 
the practice problem that following it recruited greater activation of the SPL 
and IFG in the enhanced-set condition than in the base-set condition when the 
practice problem and test problem alternately appeared, implying that the task 
switching cost from a more dominant task to a less dominant task and vice versa 
was increased after neural adaptation occurred. In other words, repeatedly 
solving a set of similar problems with the same solution likely leads to neural 
adaptation and cognitive inflexibility, which in turn have an undifferentiated 
impact on task switching. This finding expands existing knowledge about the 
neurocognitive mechanism underlying the formation of the mental set and sheds 
light on the influence of neural adaptation on subsequent processing.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cortex.2019.08.001
PMID: 31505438 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


98. J Neurosci. 2016 Jan 13;36(2):445-54. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2323-15.2016.

Spontaneous Fluctuations in the Flexible Control of Covert Attention.

Sali AW(1), Courtney SM(2), Yantis S(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences and anthony.sali@duke.edu.
(2)Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences and Department of 
Neuroscience, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 
21218, and F.M. Kirby Research Center for Functional Brain Imaging, Kennedy 
Krieger Institute, Baltimore, Maryland 21218.
(3)Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences and.

Spontaneous fluctuations in cognitive flexibility are characterized by 
moment-to-moment changes in the efficacy of control over attentional shifts. We 
used fMRI to investigate the neural correlates in humans of spontaneous 
fluctuations in readiness to covertly shift attention between two peripheral 
rapid serial visual presentation streams. Target detection response time (RT) 
after a shift or hold of covert spatial attention served as a behavioral index 
of fluctuations in attentional flexibility. In particular, the cost associated 
with shifting attention compared with holding attention varied as a function of 
pretrial brain activity in key regions of the default mode network (DMN), but 
not the dorsal attention network. High pretrial activity within the DMN was 
associated with a greater increase in shift trial RT relative to hold trial RT, 
revealing that these areas are associated with a state of attentional stability. 
Conversely, high pretrial activity within bilateral anterior insula and the 
presupplementary motor area/supplementary motor area was associated with a 
greater decrease in shift trial RT relative to hold trial RT, reflecting 
increased flexibility. Our results importantly clarify the roles of the 
precuneus, medial prefrontal cortex, and lateral parietal cortex, indicating 
that reduced activity may not simply indicate greater task engagement, but also, 
specifically, a readiness to update the focus of attention. Investigation of the 
neural correlates of spontaneous changes in attentional flexibility may 
contribute to our understanding of disorders of cognitive control as well as 
healthy variability in the control of spatial attention.
SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT: Individuals regularly experience fluctuations in 
preparatory cognitive control that affect performance in everyday life. For 
example, individuals are able to more quickly initiate a spatial shift of 
attention at some moments than at others. The current study revealed that 
pretrial brain activity in specific cortical regions predicted trial-by-trial 
changes in participants' abilities to flexibly shift the focus of attention. 
Intrinsically generated fluctuations in brain activity within several key 
default mode network regions, as well as within the anterior insula and 
presupplementary/supplementary motor areas, carried behavioral consequences for 
preparatory attentional control beyond lapses of attentional engagement. Our 
results are the first to link intrinsic variation in pretrial brain activity to 
moment-by-moment changes in preparatory attentional control over spatial 
selection.

Copyright © 2016 the authors 0270-6474/16/360445-10$15.00/0.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2323-15.2016
PMCID: PMC4710768
PMID: 26758836 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


99. J Neurosci. 2021 Mar 10;41(10):2197-2213. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2096-20.2021. 
Epub 2021 Jan 19.

Cross-Hemispheric Complementary Prefrontal Mechanisms during Task Switching 
under Perceptual Uncertainty.

Tsumura K(1), Aoki R(2), Takeda M(2), Nakahara K(2), Jimura K(3)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biosciences and Informatics, Keio University, Yokohama 
223-0061, Japan.
(2)Research Center for Brain Communication, Kochi University of Technology, Kami 
782-8502, Japan.
(3)Department of Biosciences and Informatics, Keio University, Yokohama 
223-0061, Japan jimura@bio.keio.ac.jp.

Flexible adaptation to changing environments is a representative executive 
control function implicated in the frontoparietal network that requires 
appropriate extraction of goal-relevant information through perception of the 
external environment. It remains unclear, however, how the flexibility is 
achieved under situations where goal-relevant information is uncertain. To 
address this issue, the current study examined neural mechanisms for task 
switching in which task-relevant information involved perceptual uncertainty. 
Twenty-eight human participants of both sexes alternated behavioral tasks in 
which they judged motion direction or color of visually presented colored dot 
stimuli that moved randomly. Task switching was associated with frontoparietal 
regions in the left hemisphere, and perception of ambiguous stimuli involved 
contralateral homologous frontoparietal regions. On the other hand, in 
stimulus-modality-dependent occipitotemporal regions, task coding information 
was increased during task switching. Effective connectivity analysis revealed 
that the frontal regions signaled toward the modality-dependent occipitotemporal 
regions when a relevant stimulus was more ambiguous, whereas the 
occipitotemporal regions signaled toward the frontal regions when the stimulus 
was more distinctive. These results suggest that complementary prefrontal 
mechanisms in the left and right hemispheres help to achieve a behavioral goal 
when the external environment involves perceptual uncertainty.SIGNIFICANCE 
STATEMENT In our daily life, environmental information to achieve a goal is not 
always certain, but we make judgments in such situations, and change our 
behavior accordingly. This study examined how the flexibility of behavior is 
achieved in a situation where goal-relevant information involves perceptual 
uncertainty. fMRI revealed that the lateral prefrontal cortex (PFC) in the left 
hemisphere is associated with behavioral flexibility, and the perception of 
ambiguous stimuli involves the PFC in the right hemisphere. These bilateral PFC 
signaled to stimulus-modality-dependent occipitotemporal regions, depending on 
perceptual uncertainty and the task to be performed. These top-down signals 
supplement task coding in the occipitotemporal regions, and highlight 
interhemispheric prefrontal mechanisms involved in executive control and 
perceptual decision-making.

Copyright © 2021 the authors.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2096-20.2021
PMCID: PMC8018770
PMID: 33468569 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


100. J Neuroimaging. 2025 May-Jun;35(3):e70053. doi: 10.1111/jon.70053.

Tapping and Task Switching Activation in Individuals With and Without Chronic 
Ankle Instability: fMRI Pilot Study.

Torp DM(1), Porter KH(1), Kosik KB(1), Hoch MC(1), Song K(2), Johnson NF(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Athletic Training and Clinical Nutrition, Sports Medicine 
Research Institution, University of Kentucky, Lexington, Kentucky, USA.
(2)Department of Physical Education, Yonsei University, Seoul, South Korea.
(3)Department of Physical Therapy, University of Kentucky, Lexington, Kentucky, 
USA.

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Chronic ankle instability (CAI) disrupts 
mechanoreceptors at the talocrural joint, which requires reliance on other forms 
of sensory information to maintain normal physical function. Understanding 
central nervous system activation patterns in individuals with CAI may lead to 
the development of interventions aimed at preventing long-term dysfunction. The 
primary objective of this study was to explore cortical activation patterns 
between individuals with CAI and uninjured controls during foot tapping and task 
switching.
METHODS: Twenty-six adults (13 CAI) completed a functional MRI protocol. The 
foot tapping task required participants to tap a response button under their 
metatarsal heads by plantarflexing their foot in sync with a visual stimulus. 
The switching task required participants to make a decision about a single 
stimulus feature (e.g., color or shape) during single and mixed task blocks. 
Single blocks required attention to either the shape or color of the stimulus, 
while mixed blocks required participants to switch between features (color and 
shape). Participants responded to stimuli via a plantarflexion button press. 
Between and within group voxelwise analyses were then conducted to determine 
cortical activation patterns.
RESULTS: The CAI group demonstrated greater activation in regions of visual 
processing and sensorimotor integration during foot tapping when compared to the 
uninjured controls. During task switching, the uninjured group demonstrated more 
activation in regions of cognitive flexibility, while CAI participants 
demonstrated more activation in an area of emotional processing.
CONCLUSIONS: Individuals with CAI and uninjured controls demonstrate different 
activation patterns during foot tapping and task switching.

© 2025 American Society of Neuroimaging.

DOI: 10.1111/jon.70053
PMID: 40411262 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Neuroimage. 2000 Jun;11(6 Pt 1):575-88. doi: 10.1006/nimg.2000.0581.

Regionally specific sensitivity differences in fMRI and PET: where do they come 
from?

Veltman DJ(1), Friston KJ, Sanders G, Price CJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Department of Nuclear Medicine, Vrje 
Universiteit, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

In this paper we report three neuroimaging studies of language that investigate 
potential sources of inconsistency in measured hemodynamic responses: (1) 
between sessions for fMRI, including differences in hormonal status, (2) between 
sessions for PET, and (3) between scanning modalities (PET and fMRI). 
Differences in evoked responses between sessions of the same modality were 
small. In particular we did not find any effect of hormone levels when testing 
during the first and third weeks of the menstrual cycle (although we cannot 
exclude the possibility that activation in the temporoparietal regions is 
sensitive to hormonal status). Comparing the two modalities showed that 
prefrontal regions were more activated in fMRI than in PET. This may relate to 
task switching between blocks in fMRI that is not induced by PET paradigms or 
increased error variance in these regions for PET. In contrast, temporal 
activations were found in PET more than in fMRI. We attribute the lack of 
temporal activations, in fMRI, to a combination of factors, including 
susceptibility artifacts, anticipatory activity during the control condition, 
discontinuous sampling of peristimulus time, and differences in the source, 
acquisition, and analysis of the measured signals. It is concluded that although 
there is sufficient reproducibility of results for these paradigms within each 
modality, the regionally specific differences in sensitivity found between 
modalities warrant further investigation. These regionally specific differences 
are important for a properly qualified interpretation of activation profiles in 
fMRI.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

DOI: 10.1006/nimg.2000.0581
PMID: 10860787 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Cogn Affect Behav Neurosci. 2012 Mar;12(1):16-33. doi: 
10.3758/s13415-011-0075-5.

Brain oscillatory activity associated with task switching and feedback 
processing.

Cunillera T(1), Fuentemilla L, Periañez J, Marco-Pallarès J, Krämer UM, Càmara 
E, Münte TF, Rodríguez-Fornells A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Basic Psychology, Faculty of Psychology, University of 
Barcelona, 08035 Barcelona, Spain.

In this study, we sought to dissociate event-related potentials (ERPs) and the 
oscillatory activity associated with signals indicating feedback about 
performance (outcome-based behavioral adjustment) and the signals indicating the 
need to change or maintain a task set (rule-based behavioral adjustment). With 
this purpose in mind, we noninvasively recorded electroencephalographic signals, 
using a modified version of the Wisconsin card sorting task, in which feedback 
processing and task switching could be studied separately. A similar late 
positive component was observed for the switch and correct feedback signals on 
the first trials of a series, but feedback-related negativity was observed only 
for incorrect feedback. Moreover, whereas theta power showed a significant 
increase after a switch cue and after the first positive feedback of a new 
series, a selective frontal beta-gamma increase was observed exclusively in the 
first positive feedback (i.e., after the selection of the new rule). 
Importantly, for the switch cue, beta-alpha activity was suppressed rather than 
increased. This clear dissociation between the cue and feedback stimuli in task 
switching emphasizes the need to accurately study brain oscillatory activity to 
disentangle the role of different cognitive control processes.

DOI: 10.3758/s13415-011-0075-5
PMID: 22160843 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Neurol Sci. 2022 Feb;43(2):1025-1034. doi: 10.1007/s10072-021-05437-2. Epub 2021 
Jul 10.

A night of sleep deprivation alters brain connectivity and affects specific 
executive functions.

Pesoli M(#)(1), Rucco R(#)(1)(2), Liparoti M(1), Lardone A(3), D'Aurizio G(4), 
Minino R(1), Troisi Lopez E(1), Paccone A(5), Granata C(2), Curcio G(4), 
Sorrentino G(1)(2)(5), Mandolesi L(6), Sorrentino P(2)(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Motor Sciences and Wellness, University of Naples "Parthenope", 
Naples, Italy.
(2)Institute of Applied Sciences and Intelligent Systems, CNR, Pozzuoli, Italy.
(3)Department of Social and Developmental Psychology, University of Rome 
"Sapienza", Rome, Italy.
(4)Department of Biotechnological and Applied Clinical Sciences, University of 
L'Aquila, L'Aquila, Italy.
(5)Institute for Diagnosis and Cure Hermitage Capodimonte, Naples, Italy.
(6)Department of Humanities Studies, University Federico II, Via Porta di Massa 
1, 80133, Naples, Italy. laura.mandolesi@unina.it.
(7)Institut de Neurosciences Des Systèmes, Aix-Marseille Université, Marseille, 
France.
(#)Contributed equally

Sleep is a fundamental physiological process necessary for efficient cognitive 
functioning especially in relation to memory consolidation and executive 
functions, such as attentional and switching abilities. The lack of sleep 
strongly alters the connectivity of some resting-state networks, such as default 
mode network and attentional network. In this study, by means of 
magnetoencephalography (MEG) and specific cognitive tasks, we investigated how 
brain topology and cognitive functioning are affected by 24 h of sleep 
deprivation (SD). Thirty-two young men underwent resting-state MEG recording and 
evaluated in letter cancellation task (LCT) and task switching (TS) before and 
after SD. Results showed a worsening in the accuracy and speed of execution in 
the LCT and a reduction of reaction times in the TS, evidencing thus a worsening 
of attentional but not of switching abilities. Moreover, we observed that 24 h 
of SD induced large-scale rearrangements in the functional network. These 
findings evidence that 24 h of SD is able to alter brain connectivity and 
selectively affects cognitive domains which are under the control of different 
brain networks.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s10072-021-05437-2
PMCID: PMC8789640
PMID: 34244891 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interest.


104. Cortex. 2024 Oct;179:91-102. doi: 10.1016/j.cortex.2024.07.012. Epub 2024 Aug 
10.

New functional dissociations between prefrontal and parietal cortex during task 
switching: A combined fMRI and TMS study.

Periáñez JA(1), Viejo-Sobera R(2), Lubrini G(3), Álvarez-Linera J(4), Rodríguez 
Toscano E(5), Moreno MD(6), Arango C(6), Redolar-Ripoll D(7), Muñoz Marrón E(2), 
Ríos-Lago M(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental Psychology, Complutense University of Madrid, 
Spain. Electronic address: japerian@ucm.es.
(2)Cognitive NeuroLab, Universitat Oberta de Catalunya, Barcelona, Spain.
(3)Department of Basic Psychology II, UNED, Madrid, Spain. Electronic address: 
glubrini@psi.uned.es.
(4)Neuroradiology Department, Hospital Ruber Internacional, Madrid, Spain.
(5)Department of Experimental Psychology, Complutense University of Madrid, 
Spain; Institute of Psychiatry and Mental Health, Department of Child and 
Adolescent Psychiatry, Hospital General Universitario Gregorio Marañón, 
Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria Gregorio Marañón (IiSGM), CIBERSAM, Madrid, 
Spain.
(6)Institute of Psychiatry and Mental Health, Department of Child and Adolescent 
Psychiatry, Hospital General Universitario Gregorio Marañón, Instituto de 
Investigación Sanitaria Gregorio Marañón (IiSGM), CIBERSAM, Madrid, Spain.
(7)Cognitive NeuroLab, Universitat Oberta de Catalunya, Barcelona, Spain; 
Brain360 Neuroscience Institute, Barcelona, Spain.
(8)Department of Basic Psychology II, UNED, Madrid, Spain; Brain Damage Service, 
Beata Maria Ana Hospital, Madrid, Spain.

Preparatory control in task-switching has been suggested to rely upon a set of 
distributed regions within a frontoparietal network, with frontal and parietal 
cortical areas cooperating to implement switch-specific preparation processes. 
Although recent causal evidence using transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) 
have generally supported this model, alternative results from both functional 
neuroimaging and neurophysiological studies have questioned the switch-specific 
role of both frontal and parietal cortices. The aim of the present study was to 
clarify the involvement of prefrontal and parietal areas in preparatory 
cognitive control. With this purpose, an fMRI study was conducted to identify 
the brain areas activated during cue events in a task-switching paradigm, 
indicating whether to switch or to repeat among numerical tasks. Then, TMS was 
applied over the specific coordinates previously identified through fMRI, that 
is, the right inferior frontal gyrus (IFG) and right intraparietal sulcus (IPS). 
Results revealed that TMS over the right IFG disrupted performance in both 
switch and repeat trails in terms of delayed responses as compared to Sham 
condition. In contrast, TMS over the right IPS selectively interfered 
performance in switch trials. These findings support a multi-component model of 
executive control with the IFG being involved in more general switch-unspecific 
process such as the episodic retrieval of goals, and the IPS being related to 
the implementation of switch-specific preparation mechanisms for activating 
stimulus-response mappings. The results are discussed within the framework of 
contemporary hierarchical models of prefrontal cortex organization, suggesting 
that distinct prefrontal areas may carry out coordinated functions in 
preparatory control.

Copyright © 2024 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cortex.2024.07.012
PMID: 39163787 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest CA has been a 
consultant to or has received honoraria or grants from Acadia, Angelini, 
Boehringer, Gedeon Richter, Janssen Cilag, Lundbeck, Minerva, Otsuka, Pfizer, 
Roche, Sage, Servier, Shire, Schering Plough, Sumitomo Dainippon Pharma, 
Sunovion and Takeda. The remaining authors declare that they have no conflicts 
of interest.


105. Neuroimage. 2014 Oct 1;99:332-41. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2014.05.058. Epub 
2014 May 27.

Do tasks matter in task switching? Dissociating domain-general from 
context-specific brain activity.

Muhle-Karbe PS(1), De Baene W(2), Brass M(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental Psychology, Ghent University. Electronic address: 
paulsimon.muhlekarbe@ugent.be.
(2)Department of Experimental Psychology, Ghent University.

Throughout the past decade, the task-switching paradigm has been used 
extensively as a tool to delineate the neural mechanisms underlying flexible and 
goal-directed action control. Yet, given a large number of experimental 
procedures, the task-switching literature has yielded considerable 
inconsistencies calling for a systematic evaluation of the impact of 
methodological parameters. In the present study, we examine a fundamental and 
implicit assumption that has guided previous research on task switching. Does 
switch-related brain activation (i.e., the contrast between preparatory activity 
on switch versus repetition trials) reflect abstract cognitive control processes 
that are independent of specific task demands, and thus equivalent across 
different types of tasks? To answer this question, we compared the data of two 
fMRI studies that examined updating of task goals and/or stimulus-response 
mappings under almost identical protocols, but using entirely different tasks. 
In line with an abstract control process view, our results show that the vast 
majority of switch-related brain activity is insensitive to the context in which 
it occurs. The only region that exhibited a reliable contextual modulation was 
the anterior cingulate cortex, indicating that its contribution to preparatory 
adjustments might be linked to specific task demands.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2014.05.058
PMID: 24875143 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Neuroimage. 2013 Nov 15;82:489-99. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2013.06.015. Epub 
2013 Jun 14.

Neural substrates of cognitive switching and inhibition in a face processing 
task.

Piguet C(1), Sterpenich V, Desseilles M, Cojan Y, Bertschy G, Vuilleumier P.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Faculty of Medicine, Geneva, Switzerland. 
camille.piguet@unige.ch

We frequently need to change our current occupation, an operation requiring 
additional effortful cognitive demands. Switching from one task to another may 
involve two distinct processes: inhibition of the previously relevant task-set, 
and initiation of a new one. Here we tested whether these two processes are 
underpinned by separate neural substrates, and whether they differ depending on 
the nature of the task and the emotional content of stimuli. We used functional 
magnetic resonance imaging in healthy human volunteers who categorize emotional 
faces according to three different judgment rules (color, gender, or emotional 
expression). Our paradigm allowed us to separate neural activity associated with 
inhibition and switching based on the sequence of the tasks required on 
successive trials. We found that the bilateral medial superior parietal lobule 
and left intraparietal sulcus showed consistent activation during switching 
regardless of the task. On the other hand, no common region was activated (or 
suppressed) as a consequence of inhibition across all tasks. Rather, 
task-specific effects were observed in brain regions that were more activated 
when switching to a particular task but less activated after inhibition of the 
same task. In addition, compared to other conditions, the emotional task 
elicited a similar switching cost but lower inhibition cost, accompanied by 
selective decrease in the anterior cingulate cortex when returning to this task 
shortly after inhibiting it. These results demonstrate that switching relies on 
domain-general processes mediated by postero-medial parietal areas, engaged 
across all tasks, but also provide novel evidence that task inhibition produces 
domain-specific decreases as a function of particular task demands, with only 
the latter inhibition component being modulated by emotional information.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2013.06.015
PMID: 23774397 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Neuropsychologia. 2006;44(14):2926-36. doi: 
10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2006.06.028. Epub 2006 Sep 1.

Attentional shifting and the role of the dorsal pathway in visual word 
recognition.

Pammer K(1), Hansen P, Holliday I, Cornelissen P.

Author information:
(1)The School of Psychology, The Australian National University, Canberra, ACT 
0200, Australia. Kriten.pammer@anu.edu.au

A substantial amount of evidence has been collected to propose an exclusive role 
for the dorsal visual pathway in the control of guided visual search mechanisms, 
specifically in the preattentive direction of spatial selection [Vidyasagar, T. 
R. (1999). A neuronal model of attentional spotlight: Parietal guiding the 
temporal. Brain Research and Reviews, 30, 66-76; Vidyasagar, T. R. (2001). From 
attentional gating in macaque primary visual cortex to dyslexia in humans. 
Progress in Brain Research, 134, 297-312]. Moreover, it has been suggested 
recently that the dorsal visual pathway is specifically involved in the spatial 
selection and sequencing required for orthographic processing in visual word 
recognition. In this experiment we manipulate the demands for spatial processing 
in a word recognition, lexical decision task by presenting target words in a 
normal spatial configuration, or where the constituent letters of each word are 
spatially shifted relative to each other. Accurate word recognition in the 
Shifted-words condition should demand higher spatial encoding requirements, 
thereby making greater demands on the dorsal visual stream. 
Magnetoencephalographic (MEG) neuroimaging revealed a high frequency (35-40Hz) 
right posterior parietal activation consistent with dorsal stream involvement 
occurring between 100 and 300ms post-stimulus onset, and then again at 
200-400ms. Moreover, this signal was stronger in the shifted word condition, 
compared to the normal word condition. This result provides neurophysiological 
evidence that the dorsal visual stream may play an important role in visual word 
recognition and reading. These results further provide a plausible link between 
early stage theories of reading, and the magnocellular-deficit theory of 
dyslexia, which characterises many types of reading difficulty.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2006.06.028
PMID: 16950456 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Front Hum Neurosci. 2020 Sep 9;14:561877. doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2020.561877. 
eCollection 2020.

Influence of Multiple Cardiovascular Risk Factors on Task-Switching in Older 
Adults: An fMRI Study.

Qin S(1), Basak C(1).

Author information:
(1)Center for Vital Longevity, The University of Texas at Dallas, Dallas, TX, 
United States.

Not only are the effects of cardiovascular risk factors such as high blood 
pressure and low fitness on executive functions and brain activations in older 
adults scarcely investigated, no fMRI study has investigated the combined 
effects of multiple risk factors on brain activations in older adults. This fMRI 
study examined the independent and combined effects of two cardiovascular risk 
factors, arterial plasticity, and physical fitness, on brain activations during 
task-switching in older adults. The effects of these two risk factors on 
age-related differences in activation between older and younger adults were also 
examined. Independently, low physical fitness and low arterial plasticity were 
related to reduced suppressions of occipital brain regions. The combined effects 
of these two risks on occipital regions were greater than the independent 
effects of either risk factor. Age-related overactivations in frontal cortex 
were observed in low fitness older adults. Brain-behavior correlation indicates 
that these frontal overactivations are maladaptive to older adults' task 
performance. It is possible that the resulting effects of cardiovascular risks 
on the aging brain, especially the maladaptive overactivations of frontal brain 
regions by high risk older adults, contribute to often found posterior-anterior 
shift in aging (PASA) brain activations. Furthermore, observed age-related 
differences in brain activations during task-switching can be partially 
attributed to individual differences in cardiovascular risks among older adults.

Copyright © 2020 Qin and Basak.

DOI: 10.3389/fnhum.2020.561877
PMCID: PMC7509111
PMID: 33033477


109. Neuroimage. 2019 Oct 1;199:454-465. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2019.06.022. Epub 
2019 Jun 11.

Brain network reconfiguration for language and domain-general cognitive control 
in bilinguals.

Wu J(1), Yang J(2), Chen M(1), Li S(1), Zhang Z(1), Kang C(1), Ding G(3), Guo 
T(4).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Cognitive Neuroscience and Learning & IDG/McGovern 
Institute for Brain Research, Beijing Normal University, Beijing, 100875, China.
(2)Bilingual Cognition and Development Lab, Center for Linguistics and Applied 
Linguistics, Guangdong University of Foreign Studies, Guangzhou, 510420, China.
(3)State Key Laboratory of Cognitive Neuroscience and Learning & IDG/McGovern 
Institute for Brain Research, Beijing Normal University, Beijing, 100875, China; 
Center for Collaboration and Innovation in Brain and Learning Sciences, Beijing 
Normal University, Beijing, 100875, China.
(4)State Key Laboratory of Cognitive Neuroscience and Learning & IDG/McGovern 
Institute for Brain Research, Beijing Normal University, Beijing, 100875, China; 
Center for Collaboration and Innovation in Brain and Learning Sciences, Beijing 
Normal University, Beijing, 100875, China. Electronic address: guotm@bnu.edu.cn.

For bilinguals, language control is needed for selecting the target language 
during language production. Numerous studies have examined the neural correlates 
of language control and shown a close relationship between language control and 
domain-general cognitive control. However, it remains unknown how these brain 
regions coordinate with each other when bilinguals exert cognitive control over 
linguistic and nonlinguistic representations. We addressed this gap using an 
extended unified structural equation modeling (euSEM) approach. Sixty-five 
Chinese-English bilinguals performed language switching and nonverbal switching 
tasks during functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) scanning. The results 
showed that language control was served by a cooperative brain network, 
including the frontal lobe, the parietal cortex, subcortical areas, and the 
cerebellum. More importantly, we found that language control recruited more 
subcortical areas and connections from frontal to subcortical areas compared 
with domain-general cognitive control, demonstrating a reconfigurable brain 
network. In addition, the reconfiguration efficiency of the brain network was 
mainly determined by general cognitive ability but was also mediated by second 
language (L2) proficiency. These findings provide the first data-driven 
connectivity model that specifies the brain network for language control in 
bilinguals and also shed light on the relationship between language control and 
domain-general cognitive control.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2019.06.022
PMID: 31200066 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


110. J Cogn Neurosci. 2021 Nov 5;33(12):2559-2588. doi: 10.1162/jocn_a_01779.

Dynamic Transitions between Neural States Are Associated with Flexible Task 
Switching during a Memory Task.

Liu W(1)(2), Kohn N(2), Fernández G(2).

Author information:
(1)Central China Normal University, Wuhan, China.
(2)Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.

Flexible behavior requires switching between different task conditions. It is 
known that such task switching is associated with costs in terms of slowed RT, 
reduced accuracy, or both. The neural correlates of task switching have usually 
been studied by requiring participants to switch between distinct task 
conditions that recruit different brain networks. Here, we investigated the 
transition of neural states underlying switching between two opposite 
memory-related processes (i.e., memory retrieval and memory suppression) in a 
memory task. We investigated 26 healthy participants who performed a 
think/no-think task while being in the fMRI scanner. Behaviorally, we show that 
it was more difficult for participants to suppress unwanted memories when a 
no-think was preceded by a think trial instead of another no-think trial. 
Neurally, we demonstrate that think-no-think switches were associated with an 
increase in control-related and a decrease in memory-related brain activity. 
Neural representations of task condition, assessed by decoding accuracy, were 
lower immediately after task switching compared with the nonswitch transitions, 
suggesting a switch-induced delay in the neural transition toward the required 
task condition. This suggestion is corroborated by an association between 
condition-specific representational strength and condition-specific performance 
in switch trials. Taken together, we provided neural evidence from the 
time-resolved decoding approach to support the notion that carryover of the 
previous task set activation is associated with the switching cost, leading to 
less successful memory suppression.

© 2021 Massachusetts Institute of Technology.

DOI: 10.1162/jocn_a_01779
PMID: 34644388 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


111. BMC Neurosci. 2012 Oct 3;13:119. doi: 10.1186/1471-2202-13-119.

Functional connectivity profile of the human inferior frontal junction: 
involvement in a cognitive control network.

Sundermann B(1), Pfleiderer B.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Radiology, University Hospital Münster, 
Albert-Schweitzer-Campus 1, Gebäude A1, 48149, Münster, Germany. 
benedikt.sundermann@ukmuenster.de

BACKGROUND: The human inferior frontal junction area (IFJ) is critically 
involved in three main component processes of cognitive control (working memory, 
task switching and inhibitory control). As it overlaps with several areas in 
established anatomical labeling schemes, it is considered to be underreported as 
a functionally distinct location in the neuroimaging literature. While recent 
studies explicitly focused on the IFJ's anatomical organization and functional 
role as a single brain area, it is usually not explicitly denominated in studies 
on cognitive networks. However based on few analyses in small datasets 
constrained by specific a priori assumptions on its functional specialization, 
the IFJ has been postulated to be part of a cognitive control network. Goal of 
this meta-analysis was to establish the IFJ's connectivity profile on a high 
formal level of evidence by aggregating published implicit knowledge about its 
co-activations. We applied meta-analytical connectivity modeling (MACM) based on 
the activation likelihood estimation (ALE) method without specific assumptions 
regarding functional specialization on 180 (reporting left IFJ activity) and 131 
(right IFJ) published functional neuroimaging experiments derived from the 
BrainMap database. This method is based on coordinates in stereotaxic space, not 
on anatomical descriptors.
RESULTS: The IFJ is significantly co-activated with areas in the dorsolateral 
and ventrolateral prefrontal cortex, anterior insula, medial frontal gyrus / 
pre-SMA, posterior parietal cortex, occipitotemporal junction / cerebellum, 
thalamus and putamen as well as language and motor areas. Results are 
corroborated by an independent resting-state fMRI analysis.
CONCLUSIONS: These results support the assumption that the IFJ is part of a 
previously described cognitive control network. They also highlight the 
involvement of subcortical structures in this system. A direct line is drawn 
from works on the functional significance of brain activity located at the IFJ 
and its anatomical definition to published results related to distributed 
cognitive brain systems. The IFJ is therefore introduced as a convenient 
starting point to investigate the cognitive control network in further studies.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2202-13-119
PMCID: PMC3582543
PMID: 23033990 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Neuroimage. 2008 Aug 15;42(2):945-55. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2008.05.013. 
Epub 2008 May 20.

Selective activation of the superior frontal gyrus in task-switching: an 
event-related fNIRS study.

Cutini S(1), Scatturin P, Menon E, Bisiacchi PS, Gamberini L, Zorzi M, 
Dell'Acqua R.

Author information:
(1)Department of General Psychology, Padova, Italy. simone.cutini@unipd.it

In the task-switching paradigm, reaction time is longer and accuracy is worse in 
switch trials relative to repetition trials. This so-called switch cost has been 
ascribed to the engagement of control processes required to alternate between 
distinct stimulus-response mapping rules. Neuroimaging studies have reported an 
enhanced activation of the human lateral prefrontal cortex and the superior 
frontal gyrus during the task-switching paradigm. Whether neural activation in 
these regions is dissociable and associated with separable cognitive components 
of task switching has been a matter of recent debate. We used multi-channel 
near-infrared spectroscopy (fNIRS) to measure brain cortical activity in a 
task-switching paradigm designed to avoid task differences, order 
predictability, and frequency effects. The results showed a generalized 
bilateral activation of the lateral prefrontal cortex and the superior frontal 
gyrus in both switch trials and repetition trials. To isolate the activity 
selectively associated with the task-switch, the overall activity recorded 
during repetition trials was subtracted from the activity recorded during switch 
trials. Following subtraction, the remaining activity was entirely confined to 
the left portion of the superior frontal gyrus. The present results suggest that 
factors associated with load and maintenance of distinct stimulus-response 
mapping rules in working memory are likely contributors to the activation of the 
lateral prefrontal cortex, whereas only activity in the left superior frontal 
gyrus can be linked unequivocally to switching between distinct cognitive tasks.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2008.05.013
PMID: 18586525 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


113. J Neurosci. 2017 Aug 16;37(33):8033-8042. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3656-16.2017. 
Epub 2017 Jul 20.

Switch-Independent Task Representations in Frontal and Parietal Cortex.

Loose LS(1)(2), Wisniewski D(3)(2)(4), Rusconi M(3), Goschke T(2), Haynes 
JD(3)(2)(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Bernstein Center for Computational Neuroscience Berlin and Berlin Center for 
Advanced Neuroimaging, Charité Universitätsmedizin Berlin, 10115 Berlin, 
Germany, lasse.loose@bccn-berlin.de.
(2)Department of Psychology and Collaborative Research Center Volition and 
Cognitive Control, Technische Universität Dresden, 01069 Dresden, Germany.
(3)Bernstein Center for Computational Neuroscience Berlin and Berlin Center for 
Advanced Neuroimaging, Charité Universitätsmedizin Berlin, 10115 Berlin, 
Germany.
(4)Department of Experimental Psychology, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium.
(5)Cluster of Excellence NeuroCure, Charité, and.
(6)Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Berlin School of Mind and Brain and Institute 
of Psychology, 10099 Berlin, Germany.

Alternating between two tasks is effortful and impairs performance. Previous 
fMRI studies have found increased activity in frontoparietal cortex when task 
switching is required. One possibility is that the additional control demands 
for switch trials are met by strengthening task representations in the human 
brain. Alternatively, on switch trials, the residual representation of the 
previous task might impede the buildup of a neural task representation. This 
would predict weaker task representations on switch trials, thus also explaining 
the performance costs. To test this, male and female participants were cued to 
perform one of two similar tasks, with the task being repeated or switched 
between successive trials. Multivoxel pattern analysis was used to test which 
regions encode the tasks and whether this encoding differs between switch and 
repeat trials. As expected, we found information about task representations in 
frontal and parietal cortex, but there was no difference in the decoding 
accuracy of task-related information between switch and repeat trials. Using 
cross-classification, we found that the frontoparietal cortex encodes tasks 
using a generalizable spatial pattern in switch and repeat trials. Therefore, 
task representations in frontal and parietal cortex are largely switch 
independent. We found no evidence that neural information about task 
representations in these regions can explain behavioral costs usually associated 
with task switching.SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT Alternating between two tasks is 
effortful and slows down performance. One possible explanation is that the 
representations in the human brain need time to build up and are thus weaker on 
switch trials, explaining performance costs. Alternatively, task representations 
might even be enhanced to overcome the previous task. Here, we used a 
combination of fMRI and a brain classifier to test whether the additional 
control demands under switching conditions lead to an increased or decreased 
strength of task representations in frontoparietal brain regions. We found that 
task representations are not modulated significantly by switching processes and 
generalize across switching conditions. Therefore, task representations in the 
human brain cannot account for the performance costs associated with alternating 
between tasks.

Copyright © 2017 the authors 0270-6474/17/378033-10$15.00/0.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3656-16.2017
PMCID: PMC6596903
PMID: 28729441 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Hum Brain Mapp. 2023 Nov;44(16):5460-5470. doi: 10.1002/hbm.26457. Epub 2023 Sep 
8.

Cognitive inflexibility is linked to abnormal frontoparietal-related activation 
and connectivity in obsessive-compulsive disorder.

Liu Q(1)(2)(3)(4)(5)(6)(7), Gao F(1)(2)(3), Wang X(1)(2)(3), Xia J(1)(2)(3), 
Yuan G(4)(5)(6)(7), Zheng S(4)(5)(6)(7), Zhong M(4)(5)(6)(7), Zhu X(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Medical Psychological Center, the Second Xiangya Hospital, Central South 
University, Changsha, Hunan, China.
(2)Medical Psychological Institute of Central South University, Changsha, Hunan, 
China.
(3)National Clinical Research Center for Mental Disorders, Changsha, Hunan, 
China.
(4)Key Laboratory of Brain, Cognition and Education Sciences (South China Normal 
University), Ministry of Education, Guangzhou, China.
(5)School of Psychology, South China Normal University, Guangzhou, China.
(6)Center for Studies of Psychological Application, South China Normal 
University, Guangzhou, China.
(7)Guangdong Key Laboratory of Mental Health and Cognitive Science, South China 
Normal University, Guangzhou, China.

Although it was acknowledged that patients with obsessive-compulsive disorder 
(OCD) would exhibit cognitive inflexibility, the underlying neural mechanism has 
not been fully clarified. Therefore, this study aimed to investigate the neural 
substrates involved in cognitive inflexibility among individuals with OCD. A 
total of 42 patients with OCD and 48 healthy controls (HCs) completed clinical 
assessment and functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) data collection 
during cued task switching. Behavioral performances and fMRI activation were 
compared between the OCD group and the HC group. Psychophysiological 
interactions (PPIs) analyses were applied to explore functional connectivity 
related to task switching. Pearson correlation was used to investigate the 
relationships among behavioral performance, fMRI activity, and 
obsessive-compulsive symptoms in OCD. The OCD group had a greater switch cost 
than HCs (χ2  = 5.89, p < .05). A significant difference in reaction time was 
found during switch (χ2  = 17.72, p < .001) and repeat (χ2  = 16.60, p = .018) 
between the two groups, while there was no significant difference in group 
accuracy. Comparison of group differences showed that the OCD group had 
increased activation in the right superior parietal cortex (rSPL) during task 
switching, and exhibited increased connectivity of frontoparietal 
network/default mode network (FPN-DMN; i.e., middle frontal gyrus [MFG]/inferior 
parietal cortex-precuneus, MFG-middle/posterior cingulate gyrus) and within the 
FPN (inferior parietal cortex-postcentral gyrus). In the OCD group, the 
compulsion score was positively correlated with accuracy during switch 
(r = .405, p = .008, FDRq <.05), and negatively correlated with activation of 
rSPL (r = -.328, p = .034, FDRq >.05). Patients with OCD had impaired cognitive 
flexibility and cautious response strategy. The neural mechanism of cognitive 
inflexibility in OCD may involve increased activation in the rSPL, as well as 
hyperconnectivity within the FPN and between the FPN and DMN.

© 2023 The Authors. Human Brain Mapping published by Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/hbm.26457
PMCID: PMC10543351
PMID: 37683103 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


115. Front Aging Neurosci. 2019 Oct 15;11:267. doi: 10.3389/fnagi.2019.00267. 
eCollection 2019.

Spatio-Temporal Neural Changes After Task-Switching Training in Old Age.

Dörrenbächer S(1), Schütz C(1), Woirgardt M(1), Wu CC(1)(2), Zimmer HD(1), Kray 
J(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Development of Language, Learning and Action, 
Saarland University, Saarbrücken, Germany.
(2)Department of Biological and Clinical Psychology, University of Trier, Trier, 
Germany.

In the present study, we aimed at examining selective neural changes after 
task-switching training in old age by not only considering the spatial location 
but also the timescale of brain activation changes (i.e., 
sustained/block-related or transient/trial-related timescales). We assigned a 
sample of 50 older adults to a task-switching training or an active single-task 
control group. We administered two task paradigms, either sensitive to transient 
(i.e., a context-updating task) or sustained (i.e., a delayed-recognition 
working-memory task) dynamics of cognitive control. These dynamics were captured 
by utilizing an appropriate event-related or block-related functional magnetic 
resonance imaging design. We captured selective changes in task activation 
during the untrained tasks after task-switching training compared to an active 
control group. Results revealed changes at the neural level that were not 
evident from only behavioral data. Importantly, neural changes in the 
transient-sensitive context updating task were found on the same timescale but 
in a different region (i.e., in the left inferior parietal lobule) than in the 
task-switching training task (i.e., ventrolateral PFC, inferior frontal 
junction, superior parietal lobule), only pointing to temporal overlap, while 
neural changes in the sustained-sensitive delayed-recognition task overlapped in 
both timescale and region with the task-switching training task (i.e., in the 
basal ganglia), pointing to spatio-temporal overlap. These results suggest that 
neural changes after task-switching training seem to be critically supported by 
the temporal organization of neural processing.

Copyright © 2019 Dörrenbächer, Schütz, Woirgardt, Wu, Zimmer and Kray.

DOI: 10.3389/fnagi.2019.00267
PMCID: PMC6803514
PMID: 31680929


116. Annu Int Conf IEEE Eng Med Biol Soc. 2020 Jul;2020:3256-3259. doi: 
10.1109/EMBC44109.2020.9176130.

Relationship between DTI Brain Connectivity and Functional Performance in 
Individuals with Traumatic Brain Injury().

Alivar A, Glassen M, Hoxha A, Allexandre D, Yue G, Saleh S.

this study examines the relationship between brain structural connectivity, and 
physical and cognitive performances in individuals with Traumatic Brain Injury 
(TBI). Nine moderate to severe TBI participants were included in the study, and 
regression analysis was performed to explore if DTI connectivity of 16 regions 
of interest can predict individuals' : 1) Maximum Voluntary Contraction (MVC), 
2) time component of Wolf Motor Function Test (WMFT), 3) Reaction Time (RT) 
during bimanual force matching task, 4) Performance Error Measurement (PEM) 
during bimanual force matching task, and 5) cognitive assessment of task 
switching using Trail Making (TM) test. Results showed that slower WMFT, PEM, 
and TM can be predicted by weaker cerebrospinal tract connectivity. Higher 
Caudate connectivity predicted higher WMFT and slower RT, and higher right 
Cingulum predicted faster TM. Current results suggest that measures of 
cognitive-motor interference may be better indicators of functional performance 
than single cognitive and motor performance tests.

DOI: 10.1109/EMBC44109.2020.9176130
PMID: 33018699 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Zh Vyssh Nerv Deiat Im I P Pavlova. 2015 Jan-Feb;65(1):61-71.

[FMRI study of visual task switching in healthy individuals].

[Article in Russian]

Kuptsova SV, Ivanova MV, Petrushevsky AG, Fedina ON, Zhavoronkova LA.

The present study was aimed, first, at developing a visual switching task for 
fMRI research and, second, at identification of the brain regions involved in 
task switching. Forty eight healthy individuals (from 21 to 56 years of age) 
participated in the study. The designed visual switching task was relatively 
short, it consisted of an easy stimulus set and involved a simple condition, in 
which participants had to shift their attention between two task conditions 
(classifying figures according to their form or number). Thus, this developed 
testing procedure can further be used to assess special populations, including 
patients with brain damage who cannot do monotonous tasks for a long period of 
time and have language impairments. The results of this testing technique 
revealed that task switching is carried out by an interconnected neuronal 
network, consisting of dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, inferior parietal area, 
secondary visual area, supplementary motor area and cerebellum cortex of both 
hemispheres.

PMID: 25966573 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Cereb Cortex. 2017 Mar 1;27(3):2139-2153. doi: 10.1093/cercor/bhw046.

Preparatory Engagement of Cognitive Control Networks Increases Late in 
Childhood.

Church JA(1), Bunge SA(2)(3), Petersen SE(4)(5)(6)(7)(8)(9), Schlaggar 
BL(4)(5)(6)(10)(11).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX 
78712, USA.
(2)Helen Wills Neuroscience Institute.
(3)Department of Psychology, University of California at Berkeley, Berkeley, CA 
94720, USA.
(4)Department of Neurology, Washington University in St. Louis, St. Louis, MO 
63130, USA.
(5)Department of Radiology, Washington University in St. Louis, St. Louis, MO 
63130, USA.
(6)Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology, Washington University in St. Louis, 
St. Louis, MO 63130, USA.
(7)Department of Neurosurgery, Washington University in St. Louis, St. Louis, MO 
63130, USA.
(8)Department of Psychology, Washington University in St. Louis, St. Louis, MO 
63130, USA.
(9)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Washington University in St. Louis, St. 
Louis, MO 63130, USA.
(10)Department of Pediatrics, Washington University in St. Louis, St. Louis, MO 
63130, USA.
(11)Department of Psychiatry, Washington University School of Medicine in St. 
Louis, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA.

The ability to engage task control flexibly, especially in anticipation of task 
demands, is beneficial when juggling different tasks. We investigated whether 
children in late childhood or early adolescence engaged preparatory task control 
similar to adults in a trial-wise cued task-switching paradigm. Twenty-eight 
children (aged 9-15 years) and 30 adults (aged 21-30 years) participated in an 
fMRI study in which the Cue (preparatory) period across 2 tasks was analyzed 
separately from the execution of the tasks (the Target period). Children 
performed more slowly and less accurately than adults, and showed behavioral 
improvement within the child group age range of 9-15 years. Children exhibited 
weaker Cue period activation than adults within a number of putative cognitive 
control regions. In contrast, children exhibited greater activity than adults in 
several regions, including sensorimotor areas, during the Target period. 
Children who activated cognitive control-related regions more during the Cue 
period tended to activate the Target signal age-related regions less, and this 
correlated with improved accuracy and reaction time on the task, as well as age. 
The results endorse previous findings that preparatory cognitive control systems 
are still developing in late childhood, but add new evidence of age-related 
shifts in activity at the trial level.

© The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. 
For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/cercor/bhw046
PMCID: PMC6317491
PMID: 26972753 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Cortex. 2015 Mar;64:352-62. doi: 10.1016/j.cortex.2014.12.006. Epub 2014 Dec 29.

Evidence for reduced efficiency and successful compensation in older adults 
during task switching.

Hakun JG(1), Zhu Z(1), Johnson NF(1), Gold BT(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology, University of Kentucky, Lexington, 
KY, USA.
(2)Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology, University of Kentucky, Lexington, 
KY, USA; Magnetic Resonance Imaging and Spectroscopy Center, University of 
Kentucky, Lexington, KY, USA; Sanders-Brown Center on Aging, University of 
Kentucky, Lexington, KY, USA. Electronic address: brian.gold@uky.edu.

Older adults often show different functional activation patterns than younger 
adults in prefrontal cortex (PFC) when performing cognitive control tasks. These 
differences include age-related increases in PFC activation magnitude and 
reorganized PFC functional connectivity (fC) patterns. However, it remains 
unclear whether age-related alterations in brain activation patterns reflect a 
positive mechanism (e.g., compensatory response) or a sign of brain dysfunction 
(e.g., reduced efficiency). Here we used functional magnetic resonance imaging 
(fMRI) to compare PFC activation magnitudes and PFC connectivity patterns 
between younger and older adult groups during performance of a task switching 
paradigm. Results indicated age-related increases both in PFC activation 
magnitudes and in PFC fC with inferotemporal (IT) regions. However, these 
age-related fMRI increases were differentially associated with task performance. 
Whereas increased PFC activation magnitudes tended to be either unrelated to 
task RT or associated with poorer task performance, increased PFC-IT 
connectivity was associated with better task performance in older adults. Our 
results suggest that age-related reductions in efficiency and successful 
compensation can co-exist in older adults in the context of the same task.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cortex.2014.12.006
PMCID: PMC4346415
PMID: 25614233 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


120. IEEE Trans Neural Syst Rehabil Eng. 2025;33:3674-3684. doi: 
10.1109/TNSRE.2025.3605246.

Online Neural-to-Movement Mapping Transfer for Task Switching and Retention in 
Brain-Machine Interfaces.

Song Z, Zhang X, Li M, Tan J, Wang Y.

Current brain-machine interfaces (BMIs) often rely on decoders trained for 
single tasks, limiting their flexibility in real-world applications. We propose 
an online learning framework that enables the transfer of neural-to-movement 
(knowledge) across tasks, supporting both task switching and memory retention. 
In our framework, neural activity is projected into a dynamical jPCA space to 
effectively dissociate into variant and invariant components. The variant 
components of the neural patterns are then aligned by deriving Gradient-based 
Kullback-Leibler Divergence Minimization (GKLD) for efficient online adaptation. 
A kernel reinforcement learning (KRL) model then decodes aligned neural signals 
while reusing prior neural-to-movement mapping. Evaluated on rats switching 
between a one-lever pressing and a two-lever discrimination task, the framework 
shows rapid convergence, over four times faster than the baseline method, and 
improves decoding accuracy by around 35% during task switching. Furthermore, 
when switching back to the original task, the framework successfully retains 
knowledge from the old task. Our method demonstrates general applicability to 
multiple task switching scenarios and maintains stable decoding across three 
representative days over a 21-day period, highlighting its potential for 
long-term, real-world use.

DOI: 10.1109/TNSRE.2025.3605246
PMID: 40892657 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


121. J Neurosci. 2016 Dec 14;36(50):12559-12569. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0626-16.2016. 
Epub 2016 Nov 2.

Aging Affects Dopaminergic Neural Mechanisms of Cognitive Flexibility.

Berry AS(1)(2), Shah VD(3)(2), Baker SL(3), Vogel JW(2), O'Neil JP(3), Janabi 
M(3), Schwimmer HD(2), Marks SM(2), Jagust WJ(3)(2).

Author information:
(1)Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, California 94720, and 
aberry@lbl.gov.
(2)Helen Wills Neuroscience Institute, University of California Berkeley, 
Berkeley, California 94720.
(3)Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, California 94720, and.

Aging is accompanied by profound changes in the brain's dopamine system that 
affect cognitive function. Evidence of powerful individual differences in 
cognitive aging has sharpened focus on identifying biological factors underlying 
relative preservation versus vulnerability to decline. Dopamine represents a key 
target in these efforts. Alterations of dopamine receptors and dopamine 
synthesis are seen in aging, with receptors generally showing reduction and 
synthesis demonstrating increases. Using the PET tracer 
6-[18F]fluoro-l-m-tyrosine, we found strong support for upregulated striatal 
dopamine synthesis capacity in healthy older adult humans free of amyloid 
pathology, relative to young people. We next used fMRI to define the functional 
impact of elevated synthesis capacity on cognitive flexibility, a core component 
of executive function. We found clear evidence in young adults that low levels 
of synthesis capacity were suboptimal, associated with diminished cognitive 
flexibility and altered frontoparietal activation relative to young adults with 
highest synthesis values. Critically, these relationships between dopamine, 
performance, and activation were transformed in older adults with higher 
synthesis capacity. Variability in synthesis capacity was related to intrinsic 
frontoparietal functional connectivity across groups, suggesting that striatal 
dopamine synthesis influences the tuning of networks underlying cognitive 
flexibility. Together, these findings define striatal dopamine's association 
with cognitive flexibility and its neural underpinnings in young adults, and 
reveal the alteration in dopamine-related neural processes in aging.
SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT: Few studies have combined measurement of brain dopamine 
with examination of the neural basis of cognition in youth and aging to 
delineate the underlying mechanisms of these associations. Combining in vivo PET 
imaging of dopamine synthesis capacity, fMRI, and a sensitive measure of 
cognitive flexibility, we reveal three core findings. First, we find evidence 
supporting older adults' capacity to upregulate dopamine synthesis. Second, we 
define relationships between dopamine, cognition, and frontoparietal activity in 
young adults indicating high levels of synthesis capacity are optimal. Third, we 
demonstrate alteration of these relationships in older adults, suggesting 
neurochemical modulation of cognitive flexibility changes with age.

Copyright © 2016 the authors 0270-6474/16/3612559-11$15.00/0.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0626-16.2016
PMCID: PMC5157103
PMID: 27807030 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Brain Res. 2006 Apr 21;1084(1):132-45. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2006.02.060. Epub 
2006 May 2.

Task reconfiguration and carryover in task switching: an event-related potential 
study.

Hsieh S(1), Cheng P.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, National Chung Cheng University, 168 University 
Road, Min-Hsiung, Chia-Yi 621, Taiwan. psyhsl@ccu.edu.tw

This study investigated the electrophysiological correlates of the processes 
involved in task switching. A pair-wise task-switching paradigm was used where 
each trial comprised two tasks that were either the same (task repeat) or 
different (task switch). In the paradigm, task-switch and repeat trials are 
compared in conditions of foreknowledge and non-foreknowledge of the forthcoming 
task type and during different response-stimulus intervals (RSIs). The results 
of this study show that, before the second task began in a task-pair trial, 
i.e., during the RSI, there was a CNV-like negativity for all trials. This 
indicates a general anticipatory effect. In foreknowledge conditions, there is 
an additional switch-specific reconfiguration process followed by a 
task-specific (including both switch- and repeat-related) preparatory process. 
During the post-task 2 stage, P3b was found to be smaller in switch trials than 
in repeat trials. Such differential P3b between switch and repeat trials 
appeared earlier and larger in foreknowledge than in non-foreknowledge 
conditions. The results of this study support the existence of advance 
preparation and uphold the role of carryover effects in task switching.

DOI: 10.1016/j.brainres.2006.02.060
PMID: 16647689 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Sci Rep. 2017 Mar 21;7:44917. doi: 10.1038/srep44917.

Hormone therapy at early post-menopause increases cognitive control-related 
prefrontal activity.

Girard R(1)(2), Météreau E(1)(2), Thomas J(1)(2), Pugeat M(2)(3), Qu C(1)(4), 
Dreher JC(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Neuroeconomics, Reward and Decision-making Team, Institut des Sciences 
Cognitives Marc Jeannerod, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, 69675 
Bron, France.
(2)University Claude Bernard Lyon, Lyon 1, France.
(3)Fédération d'Endocrinologie, Hospices Civils de Lyon et INSERM U1060 Institut 
CARMEN, Université Lyon 1, 69600 Oullins, France.
(4)Psychology department, South China Normal University, Guangzhou, China.

Clinical data have been equivocal and controversial as to the benefits to the 
brain and cognition of hormone therapy (HT) in postmenopausal women. Recent 
reevaluation of the role of estrogens proposed that HT may effectively prevent 
the deleterious effects of aging on cognition, and reduces the risks of 
dementia, including Alzheimer's disease, if initiated early at the beginning of 
menopause. Yet, little is known about the effects of HT on brain activation 
related to cognitive control, the ability to make flexible decisions in relation 
to internal goals. Here, we used fMRI to directly test for a modulation of 
sequential 17β estradiol (2 mg/day) plus oral progesterone (100 mg/day) on task 
switching-related brain activity in women at early postmenopause. The results 
showed that HT enhanced dorsolateral prefrontal cortex recruitment during task 
switching. Between-subjects correlation analyses revealed that women who engaged 
more the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex showed higher task switching performance 
after HT administration. These results suggest that HT, when taken early at the 
beginning of postmenopause, may have beneficial effect on cognitive control 
prefrontal mechanisms. Together, these findings demonstrate that HT can prevent 
the appearance of reduced prefrontal cortex activity, a neurophysiological 
measure observed both in healthy aging and early dementia.

DOI: 10.1038/srep44917
PMCID: PMC5359606
PMID: 28322310 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interests.


124. Brain Cogn. 2014 Jun;87:39-51. doi: 10.1016/j.bandc.2014.03.001. Epub 2014 Mar 
27.

Task preparation and neural activation in stimulus-specific brain regions: an 
fMRI study with the cued task-switching paradigm.

Shi Y(1), Meindl T(2), Szameitat AJ(3), Müller HJ(4), Schubert T(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Ludwig-Maximilians-University, Munich, Germany; 
Neuroimaging Center, Department of Psychology, Dresden University of Technology, 
Dresden, Germany. Electronic address: ssyyqq.s@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Clinical Radiology, University Hospitals-Grosshadern, 
Ludwig-Maximilian-University, Munich, Germany.
(3)Department of Psychology, Ludwig-Maximilians-University, Munich, Germany.
(4)Department of Psychology, Ludwig-Maximilians-University, Munich, Germany; 
Department of Psychological Sciences, Birkbeck College, University of London, 
UK.
(5)Department of Psychology, Ludwig-Maximilians-University, Munich, Germany; 
Department of Psychology, Humboldt-University, Berlin, Germany. Electronic 
address: torsten.schubert@psychologie.hu-berlin.de.

To investigate the role of posterior brain regions related to task-relevant 
stimulus processing in task preparation, we used a cued task-switching paradigm 
in which a pre-cue informed participants about the upcoming task on a trial: 
face discrimination or number comparison. Employing an event-related fMRI 
design, we examined for changes of activity in face- and number-related 
posterior brain regions (right fusiform face area (FFA) and right intraparietal 
sulcus (IPSnum), respectively), and explored the functional connectivity of 
these areas with other brain regions, during the (preparation) interval between 
cue onset and onset of the (to-be-responded) target stimulus. The results 
revealed task-relevant posterior brain regions to be modulated during this 
period: activation in task-relevant stimulus-specific regions was selectively 
enhanced and their functional connectivity to task-relevant anterior brain 
regions strengthened (right FFA - face task, right IPSnum - number task) while 
participants prepared for the cued task. Additionally, activity in task-relevant 
posterior brain regions was influenced by residual activation from the preceding 
trial in the right FFA and the right IPSnum, respectively. These findings 
indicate that, during task preparation, the activation pattern in currently 
task-relevant posterior brain regions is shaped by residual activation as well 
as preparatory modulation prior to the onset of the critical stimulus, even 
without participants being instructed to imagine the stimulus.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bandc.2014.03.001
PMID: 24681435 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Brain Struct Funct. 2015 Mar;220(2):587-604. doi: 10.1007/s00429-014-0803-z. 
Epub 2014 Jun 11.

The role of the right temporoparietal junction in attention and social 
interaction as revealed by ALE meta-analysis.

Krall SC(1), Rottschy C, Oberwelland E, Bzdok D, Fox PT, Eickhoff SB, Fink GR, 
Konrad K.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Neuroscience and Medicine (INM-3), Jülich Research Center, 
Jülich, Germany, s.krall@fz-juelich.de.

The right temporoparietal junction (rTPJ) is frequently associated with 
different capacities that to shift attention to unexpected stimuli (reorienting 
of attention) and to understand others' (false) mental state [theory of mind 
(ToM), typically represented by false belief tasks]. Competing hypotheses either 
suggest the rTPJ representing a unitary region involved in separate cognitive 
functions or consisting of subregions subserving distinct processes. We 
conducted activation likelihood estimation (ALE) meta-analyses to test these 
hypotheses. A conjunction analysis across ALE meta-analyses delineating regions 
consistently recruited by reorienting of attention and false belief studies 
revealed the anterior rTPJ, suggesting an overarching role of this specific 
region. Moreover, the anatomical difference analysis unravelled the posterior 
rTPJ as higher converging in false belief compared with reorienting of attention 
tasks. This supports the concept of an exclusive role of the posterior rTPJ in 
the social domain. These results were complemented by meta-analytic connectivity 
mapping (MACM) and resting-state functional connectivity (RSFC) analysis to 
investigate whole-brain connectivity patterns in task-constrained and task-free 
brain states. This allowed for detailing the functional separation of the 
anterior and posterior rTPJ. The combination of MACM and RSFC mapping showed 
that the posterior rTPJ has connectivity patterns with typical ToM regions, 
whereas the anterior part of rTPJ co-activates with the attentional network. 
Taken together, our data suggest that rTPJ contains two functionally 
fractionated subregions: while posterior rTPJ seems exclusively involved in the 
social domain, anterior rTPJ is involved in both, attention and ToM, conceivably 
indicating an attentional shifting role of this region.

DOI: 10.1007/s00429-014-0803-z
PMCID: PMC4791048
PMID: 24915964 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest The authors declare that 
they have no conflict of interest.


126. Neuropsychologia. 2019 Sep;132:107149. doi: 
10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2019.107149. Epub 2019 Jul 23.

Building the multitasking brain: An integrated perspective on functional brain 
activation during task-switching and dual-tasking.

Ward N(1), Hussey EK(2), Cunningham EC(3), Paul EJ(4), McWilliams T(5), Kramer 
AF(6).

Author information:
(1)Tufts University, 490 Boston Ave, Medford, MA, 02155, USA. Electronic 
address: nathan.ward@tufts.edu.
(2)U.S. Army Combat Capabilities Development Command - Soldier Center, 1 General 
Greene, Natick, MA, 01760, USA.
(3)University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Beckman Institute, 405 N. Mathews 
Ave, Urbana, IL, 61801, USA.
(4)Microsoft Corporation, 1 Microsoft Way, Redmond, WA, 98052, USA.
(5)Tufts University, 490 Boston Ave, Medford, MA, 02155, USA.
(6)University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Beckman Institute, 405 N. Mathews 
Ave, Urbana, IL, 61801, USA; Northeastern University, 360 Huntington Ave, 
Boston, MA, 02115, USA.

Multitasking behavior is associated with well-known performance costs, but the 
question of why individuals falter when attempting to manage multiple streams of 
information remains difficult to answer. One reason for this difficulty may be 
that multitasking costs are often characterized by isolating component processes 
that are studied largely independently. In this study, we instead integrate two 
commonly studied substrates of multitasking, task-switching and dual-tasking, 
within the same procedural context. This method allows not only a direct 
comparison of performance costs associated with different demand types but also 
examination of their interaction. We measured functional brain activation in 
thirty healthy young adults as they completed a block-design version of the 
task, observing consistent and separable patterns of frontoparietal activation 
as a function of demand type. Broadly, task-switching was associated with 
activation of left premotor and inferior parietal regions, and dual-tasking was 
associated with activation in regions of right prefrontal and inferior parietal 
cortex. In the interaction condition, we observed a distributed bilateral 
pattern of activation across the areas associated with each demand in isolation. 
These results provide both behavioral and neuroimaging evidence that 
task-switching and dual-tasking demands can be dissociated and contribute to 
multitasking costs in unique and separable ways.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2019.107149
PMID: 31348930 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Brain Cogn. 2012 Mar;78(2):148-55. doi: 10.1016/j.bandc.2011.11.001. Epub 2011 
Nov 30.

Hemispheric asymmetries and cognitive flexibility: an ERP and sLORETA study.

Ocklenburg S(1), Güntürkün O, Beste C.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience, Biopsychology, Department of Psychology, 
Ruhr-University of Bochum, Germany. sebastian.ocklenburg@rub.de

Although functional cerebral asymmetries (FCAs) affect all cognitive domains, 
their modulation of the efficacy of specific executive functions is largely 
unexplored. In the present study, we used a lateralized version of the task 
switching paradigm to investigate the relevance of hemispheric asymmetries for 
cognitive control processes. Words were tachistoscopically presented in the left 
(LVF) and right visual half field (RVF). Participants had to categorise the 
words either based on their initial letters, or according to their word type. On 
half of the trials the task changed (switch trials) whereas on the other half it 
stayed the same (repeat trials). ERPs were recorded and the neural sources of 
the ERPs were reconstructed using standardised low resolution brain 
electromagnetic tomography (sLORETA). In the word type task, participants were 
faster on repeat trials when stimuli were presented in the RVF. In contrast, in 
the initial letter task participants were faster on repeat trials and in general 
more accurate after stimulus presentation in the LVF. In both tasks, no 
hemispheric asymmetries in reaction times were observed on switch trials. On the 
electrophysiological level, we observed a left lateralization of the N1 that was 
mediated by activation in the left extrastriate cortex as well as a greater 
positivity of the P3b after stimulus presentation in the RVF compared to the LVF 
that was mediated by activation in the superior parietal cortex. These results 
show that FCAs affect the neurophysiological correlates of executive functions 
related to task switching. The relation of neurophysiological and behavioural 
asymmetries is mediated by task complexity, with more complex tasks leading to 
more interhemispheric interaction and smaller left-right differences in 
behavioural measures. These findings reveal that FCAs are an important modulator 
of executive functions related to cognitive flexibility.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bandc.2011.11.001
PMID: 22133628 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Cereb Cortex. 2025 May 1;35(5):bhaf103. doi: 10.1093/cercor/bhaf103.

Intensive task-switching training and single-task training differentially affect 
behavioral and neural manifestations of cognitive control in children.

Schwarze SA(1), Laube C(1)(2), Khosravani N(1), Lindenberger U(1)(3), Bunge 
SA(4), Fandakova Y(1)(5).

Author information:
(1)Center for Lifespan Psychology, Max Planck Institute for Human Development, 
Lentzeallee 94, 14195 Berlin, Germany.
(2)Fresenius University of Applied Sciences, Berlin, Germany.
(3)Max Planck UCL Centre for Computational Psychiatry and Ageing Research, 
Berlin, Germany, and London, United Kingdom.
(4)Department of Psychology and Helen Wills Neuroscience Institute, University 
of California at Berkeley, CA, Berkeley, United States.
(5)Department of Psychology and Institute for Cognitive and Affective 
Neuroscience, University of Trier, Trier, Germany.

The ability to flexibly switch between tasks develops during childhood. 
Children's task-switching performance improves with practice, but the underlying 
processes remain unclear. We used functional magnetic resonance imaging to 
examine how 9 weeks of task-switching training affect performance and 
task-related activation and functional connectivity. Children (8-11 years) were 
assigned to one of three groups: intensive task switching (SW; n = 72), 
intensive single tasking (SI; n = 74), and passive control (n = 41). While 
mixing costs decreased in both training groups initially, only the SW group 
maintained these training-related improvements at the end of training. 
Activation in the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex decreased with training, but 
again only the SW group maintained these activation decreases at the end of 
training. Condition-specific connectivity increases with task switching became 
less pronounced with training, especially in the SI group. Lower costs of task 
switching along with decreased task-related activations suggest increased 
processing efficiency in frontoparietal regions with training. Intensive 
task-switching training was associated with sustained changes, possibly 
facilitated by a greater mismatch between processing supplies and environmental 
demands. Our findings suggest that experience-dependent changes with intensive 
task-switching training do not mirror maturational processes but rather 
facilitate performance via more efficient task processing.

© The Author(s) 2025. Published by Oxford University Press.

DOI: 10.1093/cercor/bhaf103
PMCID: PMC12078935
PMID: 40370086 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Neuropsychologia. 2023 Jan 7;178:108445. doi: 
10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2022.108445. Epub 2022 Dec 9.

EEG source derived salience network coupling supports real-world attention 
switching.

Ojeda A(1), Wagner M(2), Maric V(3), Ramanathan D(4), Mishra J(5).

Author information:
(1)Neural Engineering and Translation Labs, Department of Psychiatry, University 
of California San Diego, USA; Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, 
University of California San Diego, USA.
(2)Department of Bioengineering, University of California San Diego, USA.
(3)Neural Engineering and Translation Labs, Department of Psychiatry, University 
of California San Diego, USA.
(4)Neural Engineering and Translation Labs, Department of Psychiatry, University 
of California San Diego, USA; Department of Mental Health, VA San Diego Medical 
Center, San Diego, CA, USA; Center of Excellence for Stress and Mental Health, 
VA San Diego Medical Center, San Diego, CA, USA.
(5)Neural Engineering and Translation Labs, Department of Psychiatry, University 
of California San Diego, USA. Electronic address: jymishra@ucsd.edu.

While the brain mechanisms underlying selective attention have been studied in 
great detail in controlled laboratory settings, it is less clear how these 
processes function in the context of a real-world self-paced task. Here, we 
investigated engagement on a real-world computerized task equivalent to a 
standard academic test that consisted of solving high-school level problems in a 
self-paced manner. In this task, we used EEG-source derived estimates of 
effective coupling between brain sources to characterize the neural mechanisms 
underlying switches of sustained attention from the attentive on-task state to 
the distracted off-task state. Specifically, since the salience network has been 
implicated in sustained attention and attention switching, we conducted a 
hypothesis-driven analysis of effective coupling between the core nodes of the 
salience network, the anterior insula (AI) and the anterior cingulate cortex 
(ACC). As per our hypothesis, we found an increase in AI - > ACC effective 
coupling that occurs during the transitions of attention from on-task focused to 
off-task distracted state. This research may inform the development of future 
neural function-targeted brain-computer interfaces to enhance sustained 
attention.

Copyright © 2022 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2022.108445
PMID: 36502931 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Psychophysiology. 2020 Nov;57(11):e13642. doi: 10.1111/psyp.13642. Epub 2020 Jul 
28.

Brain oscillatory activity associated with switch and mixing costs during 
reactive control.

Capizzi M(1), Ambrosini E(2)(3), Arbula S(4), Vallesi A(2)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroscience, University of Padova, Padova, Italy.
(2)Department of Neuroscience & Padova Neuroscience Center, University of 
Padova, Padova, Italy.
(3)Department of General Psychology, University of Padova, Padova, Italy.
(4)Area of Neuroscience, SISSA, Trieste, Italy.
(5)Brain Imaging and Neural Dynamics Research Group, IRCCS San Camillo Hospital, 
Venice, Italy.

Task-switching paradigms, which involve task repetitions and between-task 
switches, have long been used as a benchmark of cognitive control processes. 
When mixed and single-task blocks are presented, two types of costs usually 
occur: the switch cost, measured by contrasting performance on switch and repeat 
trials during the mixed-task blocks, and the mixing cost, calculated as the 
performance difference between the all-repeat trials from the single-task blocks 
and the repeat trials from the mixed-task blocks. Both costs can be mitigated by 
informational cues that signal the upcoming task switch beforehand. Recent 
electroencephalographic studies have started unveiling the brain oscillatory 
activity underlying the switch cost during the preparatory cue-target interval, 
thus, targeting proactive control processes. Less attention has instead been 
paid to the mixing cost and, importantly, to the oscillatory dynamics involved 
in switch and mixing costs during reactive control. To fill this gap, here, we 
analyzed the time-frequency data obtained during a task-switching paradigm 
wherein the simultaneous presentation of task cues and targets increased the 
need for reactive control. Results showed that while alpha and beta bands were 
modulated by switch and mixing costs in a similar gradual fashion, with greater 
suppression going from switch to repeat and all-repeat trials, theta power was 
sensitive to the switch cost with increased power for switch than repeat trials. 
Together, our findings join previous studies underlining the importance of 
theta, alpha and beta oscillations in task-switching and extend them by 
depicting the oscillations involved in switch and mixing costs during reactive 
control processes.

© 2020 Society for Psychophysiological Research.

DOI: 10.1111/psyp.13642
PMID: 32720385 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Neuroimage Clin. 2020;28:102396. doi: 10.1016/j.nicl.2020.102396. Epub 2020 Aug 
25.

Evoked and intrinsic brain network dynamics in children with autism spectrum 
disorder.

Kupis L(1), Romero C(2), Dirks B(2), Hoang S(2), Parladé MV(2), Beaumont AL(2), 
Cardona SM(2), Alessandri M(2), Chang C(3), Nomi JS(2), Uddin LQ(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Miami, Coral Gables, FL, USA. 
Electronic address: lbk48@miami.edu.
(2)Department of Psychology, University of Miami, Coral Gables, FL, USA.
(3)Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Vanderbilt 
University, Nashville, TN, USA; Department of Biomedical Engineering, Vanderbilt 
University, Nashville, TN, USA; Vanderbilt University Institute of Imaging 
Science, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN, USA.
(4)Department of Psychology, University of Miami, Coral Gables, FL, USA; 
Neuroscience Program, University of Miami Miller School of Medicine, Miami, FL, 
USA. Electronic address: l.uddin@miami.edu.

OBJECTIVE: Brain dynamics underlie flexible cognition and behavior, yet little 
is known regarding this relationship in autism spectrum disorder (ASD). We 
examined time-varying changes in functional co-activation patterns (CAPs) across 
rest and task-evoked brain states to characterize differences between children 
with ASD and typically developing (TD) children and identify relationships with 
severity of social behaviors and restricted and repetitive behaviors.
METHOD: 17 children with ASD and 27 TD children ages 7-12 completed a 
resting-state fMRI scan and four runs of a non-cued attention switching task. 
Metrics indexing brain dynamics were generated from dynamic CAPs computed across 
three major large-scale brain networks: midcingulo-insular (M-CIN), medial 
frontoparietal (M-FPN), and lateral frontoparietal (L-FPN).
RESULTS: Five time-varying CAPs representing dynamic co-activations among 
network nodes were identified across rest and task fMRI datasets. Significant 
Diagnosis × Condition interactions were observed for the dwell time of CAP 3, 
representing co-activation between nodes of the M-CIN and L-FPN, and the 
frequency of CAP 1, representing co-activation between nodes of the L-FPN. A 
significant brain-behavior association between dwell time of CAP 5, representing 
co-activation between nodes of the M-FPN, and social abilities was also observed 
across both groups of children.
CONCLUSION: Analysis of brain co-activation patterns reveals altered dynamics 
among three core networks in children with ASD, particularly evident during 
later stages of an attention task. Dimensional analyses demonstrating 
relationships between M-FPN dwell time and social abilities suggest that metrics 
of brain dynamics may index individual differences in social cognition and 
behavior.

Copyright © 2020 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.nicl.2020.102396
PMCID: PMC7479441
PMID: 32891039 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known 
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.


132. Neuroimage. 2025 Dec 1;323:121583. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2025.121583. Epub 
2025 Nov 12.

Distinct neural bases of proactive and reactive metacontrol during task 
switching.

Kang MS(1), Yu-Chin C(2).

Author information:
(1)Center for Cognitive Neuroscience, Duke University, Levine Science Research 
Center, 308 Research Drive, Durham, NC 27708, USA. Electronic address: 
moonsun.kang@duke.edu.
(2)Department of Psychological Sciences, Purdue University, 703 Third Street, 
West Lafayette, IN 47907, USA.

Metacontrol enables the retrieval of prior associations between situational 
contexts and control demands, allowing for rapid implementation of 
context-appropriate behavior. While its two behavioral modes-proactive and 
reactive-are well characterized, their underlying neural mechanisms remain 
insufficiently understood. To address this gap, we conducted a functional 
magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) study to examine whether proactive and 
reactive metacontrol rely on shared or distinct neural substrates. Using a 
task-switching paradigm, we independently induced proactive metacontrol at the 
list level and reactive metacontrol at the item level within the same 
participants, allowing direct comparison between the two metacontrol modes. 
Proactive metacontrol engaged a distributed network including the superior 
frontal gyrus, angular gyrus, and frontal operculum-regions associated with 
sustained working memory and task-rule maintenance. In contrast, reactive 
metacontrol primarily recruited the inferior frontal gyrus (IFG), consistent 
with its role in stimulus-driven conflict detection and resolution. Conjunction 
analysis revealed no overlapping regions between the two metacontrol modes. 
These findings further support the view that proactive and reactive metacontrol 
engage functionally and neurally distinct systems.

Copyright © 2025 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2025.121583
PMID: 41238032 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare that they have no competing interests.


133. J Neurosci. 2017 Nov 8;37(45):11037-11050. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0935-17.2017. 
Epub 2017 Oct 2.

Dynamic Trial-by-Trial Recoding of Task-Set Representations in the 
Frontoparietal Cortex Mediates Behavioral Flexibility.

Qiao L(1), Zhang L(1), Chen A(2), Egner T(3).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Cognition and Personality of Ministry of Education, Faculty 
of Psychology, Chongqing Collaborative Innovation Center for Brain Science, 
Southwest University, Chongqing 400715, China, and.
(2)Key Laboratory of Cognition and Personality of Ministry of Education, Faculty 
of Psychology, Chongqing Collaborative Innovation Center for Brain Science, 
Southwest University, Chongqing 400715, China, and xscat@swu.edu.cn.
(3)Center for Cognitive Neuroscience, Department of Psychology and Neuroscience, 
Duke University, Durham, North Carolina 27708.

Cognitive flexibility forms the core of the extraordinary ability of humans to 
adapt, but the precise neural mechanisms underlying our ability to nimbly shift 
between task sets remain poorly understood. Recent functional magnetic resonance 
imaging (fMRI) studies employing multivoxel pattern analysis (MVPA) have shown 
that a currently relevant task set can be decoded from activity patterns in the 
frontoparietal cortex, but whether these regions support the dynamic 
transformation of task sets from trial to trial is not clear. Here, we combined 
a cued task-switching protocol with human (both sexes) fMRI, and harnessed 
representational similarity analysis (RSA) to facilitate a novel assessment of 
trial-by-trial changes in neural task-set representations. We first used MVPA to 
define task-sensitive frontoparietal and visual regions and found that neural 
task-set representations on switch trials are less stably encoded than on repeat 
trials. We then exploited RSA to show that the neural representational pattern 
dissimilarity across consecutive trials is greater for switch trials than for 
repeat trials, and that the degree of this pattern dissimilarity predicts 
behavior. Moreover, the overall neural pattern of representational 
dissimilarities followed from the assumption that repeating sets, compared with 
switching sets, results in stronger neural task representations. Finally, when 
moving from cue to target phase within a trial, pattern dissimilarities tracked 
the transformation from previous-trial task representations to the currently 
relevant set. These results provide neural evidence for the longstanding 
assumptions of an effortful task-set reconfiguration process hampered by 
task-set inertia, and they demonstrate that frontoparietal and stimulus 
processing regions support "dynamic adaptive coding," flexibly representing 
changing task sets in a trial-by-trial fashion.SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT Humans can 
fluently switch between different tasks, reflecting an ability to dynamically 
configure "task sets," rule representations that link stimuli to appropriate 
responses. Recent studies show that neural signals in frontal and parietal brain 
regions can tell us which of two tasks a person is currently performing. 
However, it is not known whether these regions are also involved in dynamically 
reconfiguring task-set representations when switching between tasks. Here we 
measured human brain activity during task switching and tracked the similarity 
of neural task-set representations from trial to trial. We show that frontal and 
parietal brain regions flexibly recode changing task sets in a trial-by-trial 
fashion, and that task-set similarity over consecutive trials predicts behavior.

Copyright © 2017 the authors 0270-6474/17/3711037-14$15.00/0.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0935-17.2017
PMCID: PMC5678027
PMID: 28972126 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


134. J Neurosci. 2015 Feb 25;35(8):3446-59. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3710-14.2015.

Effector specificity in macaque frontal and parietal cortex.

Premereur E(1), Janssen P(1), Vanduffel W(2).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory for Neurophysiology and Psychophysiology, KU Leuven, 3000 Leuven, 
Belgium.
(2)Laboratory for Neurophysiology and Psychophysiology, KU Leuven, 3000 Leuven, 
Belgium, Athinoula A. Martinos Center for Biomedical Imaging, Massachusetts 
General Hospital, Charlestown, Massachusetts 02129, and Department of Radiology, 
Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02114 
Wim.Vanduffel@med.kuleuven.be.

Single neurons in the frontal eye fields (FEFs) and lateral intraparietal area 
(LIP) of macaques are preferentially activated by saccade- versus reach-related 
processes. fMRI studies focusing on saccade- and reach-specific activity in 
human cortex, however, provided conflicting evidence for effector specificity. 
To gain further insights into effector preferences throughout monkey cortex 
using the same technique as in humans, we performed a mixed block/event-related 
fMRI experiment in macaques. Within single fMRI runs, monkeys alternated between 
a visually guided saccade task, a visually guided arm movement task, and a 
fixation-only task requiring no saccades or arm movements. The detection of a 
peripheral pop-out go cue initiating the required operant behavior and the 
identification of a target among distractors was identical in the arm and 
saccade tasks. We found saccade-related activity in parietal areas V6, V6A, LIP, 
and caudal intraparietal area and frontal areas FEF, 45a, 45b, and 46. Areas 45 
and FEF even showed markedly decreased fMRI activity during arm movements 
relative to fixation only. Conversely, medial and anterior intraparietal areas 
(MIP and AIP), and parietal area PEip; somatosensory areas S1 and S2; and 
(pre)motor areas F1, F3, F5, and F6 showed increased arm movement-related 
activity. F1, F5, PEip, and somatosensory cortex also showed deactivations 
during saccades relative to fixation only. Control experiments showed that such 
deactivations in both operant-specific functional networks did not depend on 
training history or rapid task switching requiring active suppression of the 
unpreferred operant behavior. Therefore, although both tasks required divided 
attention to detect a pop-out go cue and target, two largely segregated and 
mainly effector-driven cortical networks were activated.

Copyright © 2015 the authors 0270-6474/15/353446-14$15.00/0.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3710-14.2015
PMCID: PMC6605566
PMID: 25716844 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Neuroimage. 2010 Dec;53(4):1272-8. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2010.05.078. Epub 
2010 Jun 15.

Bridging language and attention: brain basis of the impact of bilingualism on 
cognitive control.

Garbin G(1), Sanjuan A, Forn C, Bustamante JC, Rodriguez-Pujadas A, Belloch V, 
Hernandez M, Costa A, Avila C.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Universitat Jaume I, Castelló de la Plana, Spain.

Using two languages on an everyday basis appears to have a positive effect on 
general-purpose executive control in bilinguals. However, the neural correlates 
of this effect remain poorly understood. To investigate the brain bases of the 
bilingual advantage in executive control, we tested 21 Spanish monolinguals and 
19 Spanish-Catalan early bilinguals in a non-verbal task-switching paradigm. As 
expected based on previous experiments on non-verbal task switching, we found 
activation in the right inferior frontal cortex and the anterior cingulate of 
monolingual participants. While bilingual participants showed a reduced 
switching cost, they activated the left inferior frontal cortex and the left 
striatum, a pattern of activation consistent with networks thought to underlie 
language control. Overall, these results support the hypothesis that bilinguals' 
early training in switching back and forth between their languages leads to the 
recruitment of brain regions involved in language control when performing 
non-linguistic cognitive tasks.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2010.05.078
PMID: 20558314 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Cereb Cortex. 2015 Jun;25(6):1527-34. doi: 10.1093/cercor/bht345. Epub 2013 Dec 
15.

Selective attentional enhancement and inhibition of fronto-posterior 
connectivity by the basal ganglia during attention switching.

van Schouwenburg MR(1), den Ouden HE(2), Cools R(3).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Cognitive Neuroimaging, Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and 
Behaviour, Radboud University Nijmegen, 6500 HB Nijmegen, The Netherlands 
Department of Psychiatry, Centre for Neuroscience, Donders Institute for Brain, 
Cognition and Behaviour, Radboud University Medical Centre, 6500 HB Nijmegen, 
The Netherlands Department of Neurology, University of California, San 
Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94158, USA.
(2)Centre for Cognitive Neuroimaging, Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and 
Behaviour, Radboud University Nijmegen, 6500 HB Nijmegen, The Netherlands 
Department of Psychology, New York University, New York, NY 10003, USA.
(3)Centre for Cognitive Neuroimaging, Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and 
Behaviour, Radboud University Nijmegen, 6500 HB Nijmegen, The Netherlands 
Department of Psychiatry, Centre for Neuroscience, Donders Institute for Brain, 
Cognition and Behaviour, Radboud University Medical Centre, 6500 HB Nijmegen, 
The Netherlands.

The prefrontal cortex and the basal ganglia interact to selectively gate a 
desired action. Recent studies have shown that this selective gating mechanism 
of the basal ganglia extends to the domain of attention. Here, we investigate 
the nature of this action-like gating mechanism for attention using a spatial 
attention-switching paradigm in combination with functional neuroimaging and 
dynamic causal modeling. We show that the basal ganglia guide attention by 
focally releasing inhibition of task-relevant representations, while 
simultaneously inhibiting task-irrelevant representations by selectively 
modulating prefrontal top-down connections. These results strengthen and specify 
the role of the basal ganglia in attention. Moreover, our findings have 
implications for psychological theorizing by suggesting that inhibition of 
unattended sensory regions is not only a consequence of mutual suppression, but 
is an active process, subserved by the basal ganglia.

© The Author 2013. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. 
For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/cercor/bht345
PMID: 24343891 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Neuron. 2003 Aug 14;39(4):713-26. doi: 10.1016/s0896-6273(03)00466-5.

Neural mechanisms of transient and sustained cognitive control during task 
switching.

Braver TS(1), Reynolds JR, Donaldson DI.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Washington University, St. Louis, MO 63130, USA. 
tbraver@artsci.wustl.edu

A hybrid blocked and event-related functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) 
study decomposed brain activity during task switching into sustained and 
transient components. Contrasting task-switching blocks against single-task 
blocks revealed sustained activation in right anterior prefrontal cortex (PFC). 
Contrasting task-switch trials against task-repeat and single-task trials 
revealed activation in left lateral PFC and left superior parietal cortex. In 
both sets of regions, activation dynamics were strongly modulated by 
trial-by-trial fluctuations in response speed. In addition, right anterior PFC 
activity selectively covaried with the magnitude of mixing cost (i.e., 
task-repeat versus single-task trial performance), and left superior parietal 
activity selectively covaried with the magnitude of the switching cost (i.e., 
task-switch versus task-repeat trial performance). These results indicate a 
functional double dissociation in brain regions supporting different components 
of cognitive control during task switching and suggest that both sustained and 
transient control processes mediate the behavioral performance costs of task 
switching.

DOI: 10.1016/s0896-6273(03)00466-5
PMID: 12925284 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Neuropsychologia. 2000;38(10):1342-55. doi: 10.1016/s0028-3932(00)00046-4.

Attentional set shifting modulates the target P3b response in the Wisconsin card 
sorting test.

Barceló F(1), Muñoz-Céspedes JM, Pozo MA, Rubia FJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychobiology, Faculty of Psychology, Complutense University of 
Madrid, Spain. fbarcelo@psi.ucm.es

For years the Wisconsin card sorting test (WCST) has been used as a test of 
frontal lobe function. Recent event-related potential (ERP) research has shown 
large differences in the amplitude of P3b responses evoked by early and late 
trials within each WCST series ([8]: Barceló F., Sanz M., Molina V., Rubia FJ. 
The Wisconsin Card Sorting Test and the assessment of frontal function: A 
validation study with event-related potentials. Neuropsychologia 
1997;35:399-408). In this study, 16 normal subjects performed a WCST adaptation 
to investigate the role of attentional set shifting in these WCST P3b effects. 
Two control tasks were designed to examine whether early-late WCST P3b changes 
reflect category selection (attention) or category storage (memory) operations. 
Results suggest both a sharp P3b attenuation during shift WCST trials, followed 
by a gradual P3b build-up during post-shift trials. This P3b modulation could 
not be attributed to selection or storage of simple sensory stimulus dimensions, 
nor was it observed when the new rule was externally prompted by the first card 
in the WCST series. Instead, WCST P3b changes seem related to the endogenously 
generated shift in the perceptual rule used to sort the cards (i.e., the shift 
in set). The gradual build-up in P3b amplitude paralleled a progressive 
improvement in sorting efficiency over several post-shift WCST trials. A model 
based on formal theories of visual attention and attentional set shifting is 
proposed to account for these effects. The model offers firm grounds for 
prediction and bridges the gap between related clinical and experimental 
evidence.

DOI: 10.1016/s0028-3932(00)00046-4
PMID: 10869577 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Int J Neuropsychopharmacol. 2018 Jan 1;21(1):42-58. doi: 10.1093/ijnp/pyx088.

Mapping Compulsivity in the DSM-5 Obsessive Compulsive and Related Disorders: 
Cognitive Domains, Neural Circuitry, and Treatment.

Fineberg NA(1)(2)(3), Apergis-Schoute AM(3)(4)(5), Vaghi MM(4)(5), Banca 
P(4)(5), Gillan CM(6)(7), Voon V(3), Chamberlain SR(3)(8), Cinosi E(1)(2), Reid 
J(1)(2), Shahper S(1), Bullmore ET(3), Sahakian BJ(3), Robbins TW(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Hertfordshire Partnership University NHS Foundation Trust, Welwyn Garden 
City, Hertfordshire, United Kingdom.
(2)University of Hertfordshire, Department of Postgraduate Medicine, College 
Lane Hatfield, United Kingdom.
(3)Department of Psychiatry, School of Clinical Medicine, University of 
Cambridge, Addenbrooke's Hospital, Cambridge, United Kingdom.
(4)Behavioral and Clinical Neurosciences Institute, University of Cambridge, 
Cambridge, United Kingdom.
(5)Department of Psychology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom.
(6)School of Psychology, Trinity College Dublin, Dublin, Ireland.
(7)Global Brain Health Institute, Trinity College Dublin, Dublin, Ireland.
(8)Cambridge and Peterborough NHS Foundation Trust, Cambridge, United Kingdom.

Comment in
    doi: 10.1093/ijnp/pyx101.

Compulsions are repetitive, stereotyped thoughts and behaviors designed to 
reduce harm. Growing evidence suggests that the neurocognitive mechanisms 
mediating behavioral inhibition (motor inhibition, cognitive inflexibility) 
reversal learning and habit formation (shift from goal-directed to habitual 
responding) contribute toward compulsive activity in a broad range of disorders. 
In obsessive compulsive disorder, distributed network perturbation appears 
focused around the prefrontal cortex, caudate, putamen, and associated 
neuro-circuitry. Obsessive compulsive disorder-related attentional set-shifting 
deficits correlated with reduced resting state functional connectivity between 
the dorsal caudate and the ventrolateral prefrontal cortex on neuroimaging. In 
contrast, experimental provocation of obsessive compulsive disorder symptoms 
reduced neural activation in brain regions implicated in goal-directed 
behavioral control (ventromedial prefrontal cortex, caudate) with concordant 
increased activation in regions implicated in habit learning (presupplementary 
motor area, putamen). The ventromedial prefrontal cortex plays a multifaceted 
role, integrating affective evaluative processes, flexible behavior, and fear 
learning. Findings from a neuroimaging study of Pavlovian fear reversal, in 
which obsessive compulsive disorder patients failed to flexibly update fear 
responses despite normal initial fear conditioning, suggest there is an absence 
of ventromedial prefrontal cortex safety signaling in obsessive compulsive 
disorder, which potentially undermines explicit contingency knowledge and may 
help to explain the link between cognitive inflexibility, fear, and anxiety 
processing in compulsive disorders such as obsessive compulsive disorder.

© The Author 2017. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of CINP.

DOI: 10.1093/ijnp/pyx088
PMCID: PMC5795357
PMID: 29036632 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Hum Brain Mapp. 2024 Aug 1;45(11):e26804. doi: 10.1002/hbm.26804.

Brain activations elicited during task-switching generalize beyond the task: A 
partial least squares correlation approach to combine fMRI signals and 
cognition.

Skolasinska P(1), Qin S(2), Voss M(3), Lee HK(4), Basak C(1).

Author information:
(1)Center for Vital Longevity, Department of Psychology, The University of Texas 
at Dallas, Dallas, Texas, USA.
(2)Center for Sleep and Cognition, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National 
University of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore.
(3)Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, University of Iowa, Iowa 
City, Iowa, USA.
(4)Posit Science, San Francisco, California, USA.

An underlying hypothesis for broad transfer from cognitive training is that the 
regional brain signals engaged during the training task are related to the 
transfer tasks. However, it is unclear whether the brain activations elicited 
from a specific cognitive task can generalize to performance of other tasks, 
esp. in normal aging where cognitive training holds much promise. In this large 
dual-site functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) study, we aimed to 
characterize the neurobehavioral correlates of task-switching in normal aging 
and examine whether the task-switching-related fMRI-blood-oxygen-level-dependent 
(BOLD) signals, engaged during varieties of cognitive control, generalize to 
other tasks of executive control and general cognition. We therefore used a 
hybrid blocked and event-related fMRI task-switching paradigm to investigate 
brain regions associated with multiple types of cognitive control on 129 
non-demented older adults (65-85 years). This large dataset provided a unique 
opportunity for a data-driven partial least squares-correlation approach to 
investigate the generalizability of multiple fMRI-BOLD signals associated with 
task-switching costs to other tasks of executive control, general cognition, and 
demographic characteristics. While some fMRI signals generalized beyond the 
scanned task, others did not. Results indicate right middle frontal brain 
activation as detrimental to task-switching performance, whereas inferior 
frontal and caudate activations were related to faster processing speed during 
the fMRI task-switching, but activations of these regions did not predict 
performance on other tasks of executive control or general cognition. However, 
BOLD signals from the right lateral occipital cortex engaged during the fMRI 
task positively predicted performance on a working memory updating task, and 
BOLD signals from the left post-central gyrus that were disengaged during the 
fMRI task were related to slower processing speed in the task as well as to 
lower general cognition. Together, these results suggest generalizability of 
these BOLD signals beyond the scanned task. The findings also provided evidence 
for the general slowing hypothesis of aging as most variance in the data were 
explained by low processing speed and global low BOLD signal in older age. As 
processing speed shared variance with task-switching and other executive control 
tasks, it might be a possible basis of generalizability between these tasks. 
Additional results support the dedifferentiation hypothesis of brain aging, as 
right middle frontal activations predicted poorer task-switching performance. 
Overall, we observed that the BOLD signals related to the fMRI task not only 
generalize to the performance of other executive control tasks, but unique brain 
predictors of out-of-scanner performance can be identified.

© 2024 The Author(s). Human Brain Mapping published by Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/hbm.26804
PMCID: PMC11316247
PMID: 39126346 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Hyun Kyu Lee is a salaried employee of Posit 
Science. The other authors do not have a conflict of interest to disclose.


141. PLoS One. 2016 Dec 1;11(12):e0167396. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0167396. 
eCollection 2016.

ERP Correlates of Encoding Success and Encoding Selectivity in Attention 
Switching.

Richter FR(1), Yeung N(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental Psychology, University of Oxford, Oxford, United 
Kingdom.

Long-term memory encoding depends critically on effective processing of incoming 
information. The degree to which participants engage in effective encoding can 
be indexed in electroencephalographic (EEG) data by studying event-related 
potential (ERP) subsequent memory effects. The current study investigated ERP 
correlates of memory success operationalised with two different measures-memory 
selectivity and global memory-to assess whether previously observed ERP 
subsequent memory effects reflect focused encoding of task-relevant information 
(memory selectivity), general encoding success (global memory), or both. 
Building on previous work, the present study combined an attention switching 
paradigm-in which participants were presented with compound object-word stimuli 
and switched between attending to the object or the word across trials-with a 
later recognition memory test for those stimuli, while recording their EEG. Our 
results provided clear evidence that subsequent memory effects resulted from 
selective attentional focusing and effective top-down control (memory 
selectivity) in contrast to more general encoding success effects (global 
memory). Further analyses addressed the question of whether successful encoding 
depended on similar control mechanisms to those involved in attention switching. 
Interestingly, differences in the ERP correlates of attention switching and 
successful encoding, particularly during the poststimulus period, indicated that 
variability in encoding success occurred independently of prestimulus demands 
for top-down cognitive control. These results suggest that while effects of 
selective attention and selective encoding co-occur behaviourally their ERP 
correlates are at least partly dissociable.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0167396
PMCID: PMC5131936
PMID: 27907075 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.


142. Aging (Albany NY). 2022 Jun 17;14(12):4976-4989. doi: 10.18632/aging.204129. 
Epub 2022 Jun 17.

Differential impact of glycemic control and comorbid conditions on the 
neurophysiology underlying task switching in older adults with type 2 diabetes.

Embury CM(1)(2), Lord GH(3), Drincic AT(3), Desouza CV(3), Wilson TW(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Human Neuroscience, Boys Town National Research Hospital, Boys 
Town, NE 68010, USA.
(2)Department of Psychology, University of Nebraska Omaha, Omaha, NE 68182, USA.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Diabetes, Endocrinology and 
Metabolism, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE 68198, USA.

Type 2 diabetes is known to negatively affect higher order cognition and the 
brain, but the underlying mechanisms are not fully understood. In particular, 
glycemic control and common comorbidities are both thought to contribute to 
alterations in cortical neurophysiology in type 2 diabetes, but their specific 
impact remains unknown. The current study probed the dynamics underlying 
cognitive control in older participants with type 2 diabetes, with and without 
additional comorbid conditions (i.e., cardiovascular disease, nephropathy, 
peripheral neuropathy, retinopathy), using a task switching paradigm and a 
dynamic functional brain mapping method based on magnetoencephalography (MEG). 
We hypothesized that neural dynamics would be differentially impacted by the 
level of glycemic control (i.e., diabetes itself) and the burden of additional 
comorbid conditions. Supporting this hypothesis, our findings indicated 
separable, but widespread alterations across frontal, parietal, temporal and 
cerebellum regions in neural task-switch costs in type 2 diabetes that were 
differentially attributable to glycemic control and the presence of comorbid 
conditions. These effects were spatially non-overlapping and the effects were 
not statistically related to one another. Further, several of the effects that 
were related to the presence of comorbidities were associated with behavioral 
performance, indicating progressive deficits in brain function with extended 
disease. These findings provide insight on the underlying neuropathology and may 
inform future treatment plans to curtail the neural impact of type 2 diabetes.

DOI: 10.18632/aging.204129
PMCID: PMC9271300
PMID: 35714977 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICTS OF INTEREST: Authors C.M.E., G.H.L., 
A.T.D., and T.W.W. have no conflicts of interest to declare. C.V.D. is a 
consultant with NovoNordisk, Bayer, and AstraZeneca, and receives research 
funding from Theracos and Sanofi.


143. Cereb Cortex. 2010 Jun;20(6):1420-31. doi: 10.1093/cercor/bhp206. Epub 2009 Oct 
5.

Age-related shifts in brain activity dynamics during task switching.

Jimura K(1), Braver TS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Washington University in St Louis, St Louis, MO 
63139, USA. kjimura@wustl.edu

Cognitive aging studies have suggested that older adults show declines in both 
sustained and transient cognitive control processes. However, previous 
neuroimaging studies have primarily focused on age-related change in the 
magnitude, but not temporal dynamics, of brain activity. The present study 
compared brain activity dynamics in healthy old and young adults during task 
switching. A mixed blocked/event-related functional magnetic resonance imaging 
design enabled separation of transient and sustained neural activity associated 
with cognitive control. Relative to young adults, older adults exhibited not 
only decreased sustained activity in the anterior prefrontal cortex (aPFC) 
during task-switching blocks but also increased transient activity on 
task-switch trials. Another pattern of age-related shift in dynamics was present 
in the lateral PFC (lPFC) and posterior parietal cortex (PPC), with younger 
adults showing a cue-related response during task-switch trials in lPFC and PPC, 
whereas older adults exhibited switch-related activation during the cue period 
in PPC only. In all 3 regions, these qualitatively distinct patterns of brain 
activity predicted qualitatively distinct patterns of behavioral performance 
across the 2 age groups. Together, these results suggest that older adults may 
shift from a proactive to reactive cognitive control strategy as a means of 
retaining relatively preserved behavioral performance in the face of age-related 
neurocognitive changes.

DOI: 10.1093/cercor/bhp206
PMCID: PMC2871374
PMID: 19805420 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Eur J Neurosci. 2005 Apr;21(7):1984-92. doi: 10.1111/j.1460-9568.2005.04027.x.

Cocaine dependence and attention switching within and between verbal and 
visuospatial working memory.

Kübler A(1), Murphy K, Garavan H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology and Institute of Neuroscience, Trinity College 
Dublin, Dublin, Ireland.

Many studies have shown the negative effects of cocaine on neuropsychological 
and cognitive performance in drug-dependent individuals, but little is known 
about the underlying neuroanatomy of these dysfunctions. The present study 
addressed attention switching between items held in working memory (WM) with a 
task in which subjects were required to store and update two items held in 
verbal or visuospatial WM. Attention-switching frequency varied between trials, 
thereby allowing us to isolate the switching component of task performance. 
Behavioural data revealed that cocaine addicts performed worse than healthy 
controls in all tasks. On the visuospatial task addicts performed at chance 
levels revealing particular impairment in visuospatial WM. On the verbal task, 
in which controls and users could be matched for performance, we identified 
attenuated responses in prefrontal and cingulate cortices and in striatal 
regions, while other areas such as dorsolateral prefrontal cortex did not differ 
between healthy controls and users. The results reveal that addiction may be 
accompanied by specific rather than ubiquitous hypoactivation in prefrontal and 
subcortical areas and suggest a compromised ability in users to control their 
attention to their thoughts as might be particularly relevant when required to 
switch away from drug-related thoughts, and thus the dysfunction in attention 
switching may contribute to the maintenance of addiction.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1460-9568.2005.04027.x
PMID: 15869491 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Elife. 2018 Aug 16;7:e39497. doi: 10.7554/eLife.39497.

Integrated externally and internally generated task predictions jointly guide 
cognitive control in prefrontal cortex.

Jiang J(1), Wagner AD(1)(2), Egner T(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Stanford University, Stanford, United States.
(2)Neuroscience Program, Stanford University, Stanford, United States.
(3)Center for Cognitive Neuroscience, Duke University, Durham, United States.
(4)Department of Psychology and Neuroscience, Duke University, Durham, United 
States.

Cognitive control proactively configures information processing to suit expected 
task demands. Predictions of forthcoming demand can be driven by explicit 
external cues or be generated internally, based on past experience (cognitive 
history). However, it is not known whether and how the brain reconciles these 
two sources of information to guide control. Pairing a probabilistic 
task-switching paradigm with computational modeling, we found that external and 
internally generated predictions jointly guide task preparation, with a bias for 
internal predictions. Using model-based neuroimaging, we then show that the two 
sources of task prediction are integrated in dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, and 
jointly inform a representation of the likelihood of a change in task demand, 
encoded in frontoparietal cortex. Upon task-stimulus onset, dorsomedial 
prefrontal cortex encoded the need for reactive task-set adjustment. These data 
reveal how the human brain integrates external cues and cognitive history to 
prepare for an upcoming task.

© 2018, Jiang et al.

DOI: 10.7554/eLife.39497
PMCID: PMC6126922
PMID: 30113310 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: JJ, AW, TE No competing interests declared


146. Biling (Camb Engl). 2024 Aug;27(4):690-699. doi: 10.1017/s1366728923000834. Epub 
2023 Dec 6.

The Role of the Dorsolateral Prefrontal Cortex in Bilingual Language Switching 
and Non-Linguistic Task-Switching: Evidence from Multi-Voxel Pattern Analysis.

Vaughn KA(1)(2), Tamber-Rosenau BJ(1), Hernandez AE(1).

Author information:
(1)University of Houston.
(2)University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston.

Previous research suggests that bilingual language control requires 
domain-general cognitive control. Recent research suggests that exploration of 
individual differences is key for understanding the relationship between 
bilingual language control and cognitive control. The current study used 
multi-voxel pattern analysis (MVPA) to examine within-subject patterns of fMRI 
activity in the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC) during bilingual language 
switching and non-linguistic task-switching. We hypothesized that bilinguals 
would have identifiable, within-subject patterns of DLPFC activity for both 
types of switching and that bilinguals and monolinguals would differ in patterns 
of DLPFC activity for task-switching. We were unable to identify patterns of 
DLPFC activity associated with bilingual language switching. Task-switching was 
related to patterns of left DLPFC activity for both bilinguals and monolinguals, 
and there were identifiable patterns of right DLPFC activity for the bilinguals 
only. These findings suggest that the DLPFC is not the key brain structure 
connecting bilingual language and task-switching.

DOI: 10.1017/s1366728923000834
PMCID: PMC11580812
PMID: 39583202


147. Eur Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 2020 Feb;29(2):217-226. doi: 
10.1007/s00787-019-01350-4. Epub 2019 May 21.

Performance and brain activity during the Wisconsin Card Sorting Test in 
adolescents with obsessive-compulsive disorder and adolescents with 
weight-restored anorexia nervosa.

Bohon C(1), Weinbach N(2), Lock J(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Stanford University School 
of Medicine, 401 Quarry Road, Stanford, CA, 94305-5719, USA. 
cbohon@stanford.edu.
(2)Department of Psychology, University of Haifa, Haifa, Israel.
(3)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Stanford University School 
of Medicine, 401 Quarry Road, Stanford, CA, 94305-5719, USA.

Anorexia nervosa (AN) and obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) both show a peak 
age of onset during adolescence and share a number of phenotypic features, such 
as rigid rule-bound behavior and perseverative thinking. There is evidence of 
difficulties with set shifting or task switching in adults with each disorder, 
but evidence in adolescents is limited. Furthermore, no studies have previously 
directly compared AN and OCD on this cognitive process or examined comparative 
neural correlates. This study provides exploratory analyses to address this gap 
by measuring brain activity with functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) 
during a computerized version of the Wisconsin Card Sorting Test (WCST) in 
female adolescents with weight-restored AN (WR-AN) (n = 14), OCD (n = 11), and 
healthy controls (n = 24). Results revealed greater perseverative errors in the 
OCD group than healthy controls and WR-AN, but no difference between WR-AN and 
healthy controls. Greater activity in the right front pole, inferior frontal 
gyrus, and middle frontal gyrus during the task (compared to a control matching 
task) was associated with more perseverative errors in the OCD group, but not 
healthy controls. The correlation between perseverative errors and brain 
response to the task in the WR-AN group was not different from either comparison 
group. These findings propose a hypothesis that behavioral similarities between 
OCD and AN, as well as difficulties with set shifting in adults with AN, are 
driven by obsessive-compulsive features present in AN rather than a shared 
underlying neurocognitive signature. This notion should be tested in larger 
samples in future studies.

DOI: 10.1007/s00787-019-01350-4
PMCID: PMC6868308
PMID: 31114967 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest: The authors declare that 
they have no conflict of interest.


148. Brain. 2004 Jul;127(Pt 7):1561-73. doi: 10.1093/brain/awh169. Epub 2004 Apr 16.

A componential analysis of task-switching deficits associated with lesions of 
left and right frontal cortex.

Aron AR(1), Monsell S, Sahakian BJ, Robbins TW.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of Cambridge, UK

Executive functions such as task-set switching are thought to depend on the 
frontal cortex. However, more precision is required in identifying which 
components of such high-level processes relate to which, if any, subregions of 
the brain. In a recent study of 19 patients with focal right frontal (RF) 
lesions and 17 with left frontal (LF) lesions, we found that response 
inhibition, as measured by the stop-signal task, was specifically disrupted by 
damage to the right inferior frontal gyrus (IFG). The present study examined 
task-switching performance in this same group of patients and in matched 
controls on the grounds that inhibitory mechanisms may also be required to 
switch task-set. Both RF and LF patients showed significantly larger switch 
costs (the difference, in reaction time and errors, between changing tasks and 
repeating the same task) than controls, but apparently for different reasons. 
For RF patients, a part of the switch deficit could be accounted for by impaired 
inhibition of inappropriate responses or task-sets triggered by stimuli, and one 
measure of the switch cost correlated reliably with damage to the IFG, 
specifically the pars opercularis (POp). For LF patients, a part of the switch 
deficit may have arisen from weak top-down control of task-set. The degree of 
top-down control correlated reliably with the extent of damage to the left 
middle frontal gyrus (MFG). This study localizes two components of the complex 
task-switching process (inhibition of task-sets and/or responses and top-down 
control of task-set) to the right IFG/POp and the left MFG respectively.

Copyright 2004 Guarantors of Brain

DOI: 10.1093/brain/awh169
PMID: 15090477 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Hum Brain Mapp. 2017 Mar;38(3):1588-1603. doi: 10.1002/hbm.23473. Epub 2016 Nov 
23.

Age-related decline in task switching is linked to both global and 
tract-specific changes in white matter microstructure.

Jolly TA(1)(2)(3)(4), Cooper PS(1)(2)(3)(4), Rennie JL(1)(2)(3)(4), Levi 
CR(2)(4)(5), Lenroot R(6), Parsons MW(2)(4)(5), Michie PT(1)(3)(4), Karayanidis 
F(1)(2)(4).

Author information:
(1)Functional Neuroimaging Laboratory, School of Psychology, University of 
Newcastle, Newcastle, Australia.
(2)Priority Research Centre for Stroke and Brain Injury, University of 
Newcastle, Newcastle, Australia.
(3)Priority Research Centre for Brain and Mental Health Research, University of 
Newcastle, Newcastle, Australia.
(4)Hunter Medical Research Institute, Newcastle, Australia.
(5)School of Medicine and Public Health, University of Newcastle, Newcastle, 
Australia.
(6)Neuroscience Research Australia, University of New South Wales, Sydney, 
Australia.

Task-switching performance relies on a broadly distributed frontoparietal 
network and declines in older adults. In this study, they investigated whether 
this age-related decline in task switching performance was mediated by 
variability in global or regional white matter microstructural health. Seventy 
cognitively intact adults (43-87 years) completed a cued-trials task switching 
paradigm. Microstructural white matter measures were derived using diffusion 
tensor imaging (DTI) analyses on the diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) sequence. 
Task switching performance decreased with increasing age and radial diffusivity 
(RaD), a measure of white matter microstructure that is sensitive to myelin 
structure. RaD mediated the relationship between age and task switching 
performance. However, the relationship between RaD and task switching 
performance remained significant when controlling for age and was stronger in 
the presence of cardiovascular risk factors. Variability in error and RT mixing 
cost were associated with RaD in global white matter and in frontoparietal white 
matter tracts, respectively. These findings suggest that age-related increase in 
mixing cost may result from both global and tract-specific disruption of 
cerebral white matter linked to the increased incidence of cardiovascular risks 
in older adults. Hum Brain Mapp 38:1588-1603, 2017. © 2016 Wiley Periodicals, 
Inc.

© 2016 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/hbm.23473
PMCID: PMC6866847
PMID: 27879030 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Brain Res. 2013 Aug 21;1527:15-28. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2013.06.003. Epub 
2013 Jun 28.

White matter microstructure correlates of inhibition and task-switching in 
adolescents.

Seghete KL(1), Herting MM, Nagel BJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Behavioral Neuroscience, Oregon Health & Science University, 
3181 SW Sam Jackson Park Road, L470, Portland, OR 97239, USA. mackiewi@ohsu.edu

Although protracted prefrontal gray matter development is associated with 
concomitant executive function (EF) development in adolescents, few studies have 
explored the relationship between white matter and EF. This study examined the 
relationship between white matter microstructure and two aspects of EF, 
inhibition and task-switching, in a sample of 84 adolescents using diffusion 
tensor imaging (DTI). Tract-Based Spatial Statistics (TBSS) were used to examine 
fractional anisotropy (FA) and mean diffusivity (MD). Adolescents completed the 
Color-Word Interference task from the Delis-Kaplan Executive Function System, a 
clinical version of the Stroop task. Inhibition and task-switching performance 
were group normalized and measured using both reaction time and errors. 
Performance and the interaction of age and performance were regressed on FA and 
MD white matter skeletons, controlling for age and IQ, separately for inhibition 
and task-switching. Follow up analyses examined the relative contributions of 
axial and radial diffusivities. Greater FA in the anterior corona radiata (ACR) 
was associated with better inhibition, independent of age. Greater FA in the SCR 
and precentral gyrus white matter were associated with better task-switching, 
regardless of age, whereas an association between FA in the ACR and 
task-switching was dependent on age. There were no significant associations 
between MD and performance. Results suggest better inhibition and task-switching 
are associated with greater integrity of white matter microstructure in regions 
supporting cross-cortical and cortical-subcortical connections stemming from the 
prefrontal cortex. These findings are consistent with functional studies of 
cognitive control and models of EF that propose separate, yet related, latent 
factors.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.brainres.2013.06.003
PMCID: PMC3758237
PMID: 23811486 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Neuropsychologia. 2015 Oct;77:19-34. doi: 
10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2015.07.019. Epub 2015 Jul 18.

Neural networks supporting switching, hypothesis testing, and rule application.

Liu Z(1), Braunlich K(2), Wehe HS(2), Seger CA(3).

Author information:
(1)South China Normal University, School of Psychology, Center for Studies of 
Psychological Application, Guangzhou, China. Electronic address: 
zhiyaliu@scnu.edu.cn.
(2)Colorado State University, Department of Psychology, Colorado, United States; 
Colorado State University, Molecular, Cellular and Integrative Neurosciences 
Program, Colorado, United States.
(3)South China Normal University, School of Psychology, Center for Studies of 
Psychological Application, Guangzhou, China; Colorado State University, 
Department of Psychology, Colorado, United States; Colorado State University, 
Molecular, Cellular and Integrative Neurosciences Program, Colorado, United 
States. Electronic address: Carol.Seger@colostate.edu.

We identified dynamic changes in recruitment of neural connectivity networks 
across three phases of a flexible rule learning and set-shifting task similar to 
the Wisconsin Card Sort Task: switching, rule learning via hypothesis testing, 
and rule application. During fMRI scanning, subjects viewed pairs of stimuli 
that differed across four dimensions (letter, color, size, screen location), 
chose one stimulus, and received feedback. Subjects were informed that the 
correct choice was determined by a simple unidimensional rule, for example 
"choose the blue letter". Once each rule had been learned and correctly applied 
for 4-7 trials, subjects were cued via either negative feedback or visual cues 
to switch to learning a new rule. Task performance was divided into three 
phases: Switching (first trial after receiving the switch cue), hypothesis 
testing (subsequent trials through the last error trial), and rule application 
(correct responding after the rule was learned). We used both univariate 
analysis to characterize activity occurring within specific regions of the 
brain, and a multivariate method, constrained principal component analysis for 
fMRI (fMRI-CPCA), to investigate how distributed regions coordinate to subserve 
different processes. As hypothesized, switching was subserved by a limbic 
network including the ventral striatum, thalamus, and parahippocampal gyrus, in 
conjunction with cortical salience network regions including the anterior 
cingulate and frontoinsular cortex. Activity in the ventral striatum was 
associated with switching regardless of how switching was cued; visually cued 
shifts were associated with additional visual cortical activity. After 
switching, as subjects moved into the hypothesis testing phase, a broad 
fronto-parietal-striatal network (associated with the cognitive control, dorsal 
attention, and salience networks) increased in activity. This network was 
sensitive to rule learning speed, with greater extended activity for the slowest 
learning speed late in the time course of learning. As subjects shifted from 
hypothesis testing to rule application, activity in this network decreased and 
activity in the somatomotor and default mode networks increased.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2015.07.019
PMCID: PMC4609611
PMID: 26197092 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Front Aging Neurosci. 2022 Jul 13;14:900581. doi: 10.3389/fnagi.2022.900581. 
eCollection 2022.

Extraversion Is Associated With Lower Brain Beta-Amyloid Deposition in 
Cognitively Normal Older Adults.

Oh H(1)(2)(3)(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Human Behavior, Warren Alpert Medical School, 
Brown University, Providence, RI, United States.
(2)Department of Cognitive, Linguistic, and Psychological Sciences, Brown 
University, Providence, RI, United States.
(3)Carney Institute for Brain Science, Brown University, Providence, RI, United 
States.
(4)Memory and Aging Program, Butler Hospital, Providence, RI, United States.
(5)Division of Cognitive Neuroscience, Department of Neurology, Columbia 
University College of Physicians and Surgeons, New York, NY, United States.

Emerging evidence suggests that some personality traits may link to the 
vulnerability to or protection for Alzheimer's disease (AD). A causal mechanism 
underlying this relationship, however, remains largely unknown. Using 
18F-Florbetaben positron emission tomography (PET) binding to beta-amyloid (Aβ) 
plaques, a pathological feature of AD, and functional magnetic resonance imaging 
(fMRI), we investigated pathological and functional correlates of extraversion 
and neuroticism in a group of healthy young and older subjects. We quantified 
the level of brain Aβ deposition in older individuals. Brain activity was 
measured in young adults using a task-switching fMRI paradigm. When we 
correlated personality scores of extraversion and neuroticism with these 
pathological and functional measures, higher extraversion, but not neuroticism, 
was significantly associated with lower global Aβ measures among older adults, 
accounting for age and sex. This association was present across widespread brain 
regions. Among young subjects, higher extraversion was associated with lower 
activity during task switching in the anterior cingulate cortex, left anterior 
insular cortex, left putamen, and middle frontal gyrus bilaterally, while higher 
neuroticism was associated with increased activity throughout the brain. The 
present results suggest that possibly via efficient neuronal activity, 
extraversion, one of the lifelong personality traits, may confer the protective 
mechanism against the development of Aβ pathology during aging.

Copyright © 2022 Oh.

DOI: 10.3389/fnagi.2022.900581
PMCID: PMC9325961
PMID: 35912077

Conflict of interest statement: The author declares that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.


153. J Gerontol B Psychol Sci Soc Sci. 2023 Oct 9;78(10):1651-1658. doi: 
10.1093/geronb/gbad092.

Functional Connectivity Alterations of Cognitive Flexibility in Aging: Different 
Patterns of Global and Local Switch Costs.

Li T(1), Xia H(1), Li H(1), He Q(1), Chen A(2).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Cognition and Personality of Ministry of Education, Faculty 
of Psychology, Southwest University, Chongqing 400715, China.
(2)School of Psychology, Research Center for Exercise and Brain Science, 
Shanghai University of Sport, Shanghai 200438, China.

OBJECTIVES: Cognitive flexibility declines with aging and is usually indicated 
by task switch costs including global and local switch costs. Cognitive 
flexibility in aging is associated with alterations in functional connectivity. 
However, whether different task-modulated connectivity mechanisms underlying 
global and local switch costs remain unclear.
METHODS: Here we use the support vector machine to identify age-related 
functional connectivity in global and local switch costs between older (n = 32) 
and young adults (n = 33). Participants completed a cued task-switching task 
during the functional magnetic resonance imaging scan.
RESULTS: Results show an age-related decline behaviorally in global but not in 
local switch costs. Moreover, distinct patterns of age-related alterations of 
connectivity were observed for each cost. Specifically, only multivariate 
changes in connectivity patterns were observed for local switch cost, whereas 
specific age-related connections were revealed for global switch cost. In older 
adults, the task-modulated left dorsal premotor cortex-left precuneus 
connectivity decreased, and the left inferior frontal junction-left inferior 
parietal sulcus connectivity correlated with decreased global switch cost.
DISCUSSION: This study provides novel evidence for different neural patterns in 
global and local switch costs by illuminating connectivity mechanisms underlying 
cognitive flexibility in aging.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of The 
Gerontological Society of America. All rights reserved. For permissions, please 
e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/geronb/gbad092
PMID: 37330623 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Neuropsychologia. 2019 Sep;132:107134. doi: 
10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2019.107134. Epub 2019 Jul 9.

Inhibit, switch, and update: A within-subject fMRI investigation of executive 
control.

Lemire-Rodger S(1), Lam J(1), Viviano JD(1), Stevens WD(1), Spreng RN(2), Turner 
GR(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, York University, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(2)Laboratory of Brain and Cognition, Montreal Neurological Institute, 
Department of Neurology and Neurosurgery, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, 
Canada; Departments of Psychiatry and Psychology, McGill University, Montreal, 
Quebec, Canada; Douglas Mental Health University Institute, Verdun, Quebec, 
Canada.
(3)Department of Psychology, York University, Toronto, ON, Canada. Electronic 
address: grturner@yorku.ca.

An influential model of executive control suggests that it comprises three 
dissociable processes: working memory, inhibition, and task switching. Multiple 
studies have investigated how these processes are individually implemented in 
the human brain. However, few have directly investigated this question using a 
common task architecture and a within-subject design. Here, healthy adult humans 
(N = 22) performed a novel executive control task during fMRI scanning. The 
paradigm independently manipulated working memory updating, inhibition, and task 
switching demands, while keeping all other task features constant. Direct 
contrasts of each executive task with a closely matched control condition 
revealed a differentiated pattern of recruitment across control tasks: working 
memory was associated with activity in dorsolateral prefrontal, lateral parietal 
and insular cortices bilaterally; Inhibition engaged right lateral and superior 
medial prefrontal cortex, inferior parietal lobules bilaterally, right middle 
and inferior temporal cortex, and ventral visual processing regions; Task 
switching was associated with bilateral activity in medial prefrontal cortex, 
posterior cingulate cortex and precuneus, as well as left inferior parietal 
lobule, lateral temporal cortex and right thalamus. A conjunction of all 
executive versus control task activations revealed common areas of activation 
overlapping regions of canonical frontoparietal control and dorsal attention 
networks. Further, multivariate analyses suggest that working memory may be a 
putative common factor supporting executive functioning. Taken together, these 
results are consistent with a hybrid model of executive control in the human 
brain.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2019.107134
PMID: 31299188 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Soc Cogn Affect Neurosci. 2022 Feb 15;17(2):198-205. doi: 10.1093/scan/nsab086.

Fathers' involvement in early childcare is associated with amygdala 
resting-state connectivity.

Horstman LI(1)(2), Riem MME(1)(3), Alyousefi-van Dijk K(1)(2), Lotz AM(1)(2), 
Bakermans-Kranenburg MJ(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Clinical Child and Family Studies, Faculty of Behavioral and Movement 
Sciences, Vrije Universiteit, Amsterdam 1081 BT, The Netherlands.
(2)Leiden Institute for Brain and Cognition, Leiden University Medical Center, 
Leiden 2300 RC, The Netherlands.
(3)Behavioral Science Institute, Radboud University, Nijmegen 6500 HE, The 
Netherlands.

Becoming a parent requires new skills and frequent task switching during daily 
childcare. Little is known about the paternal brain during the transition to 
fatherhood. The present study examined intrinsic neuronal network connectivity 
in a group of first-time expectant and new fathers (total N = 131) using 
amygdala seed-based resting-state functional connectivity analysis. Furthermore, 
we examined the association between paternal involvement (i.e. hours spent in 
childcare and real-time push notifications on smartphone) and connectivity 
within the parental brain network in new fathers. There were no significant 
differences in functional connectivity between expectant and new fathers. 
However, results show that in new fathers, time spent in childcare was 
positively related to amygdala connectivity with the supramarginal gyrus, 
postcentral gyrus and the superior parietal lobule-all regions within the 
cognition/mentalizing network that have been associated with empathy and social 
cognition. Our results suggest that fathers' time investment in childcare is 
related to connectivity networks in the parental brain.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press.

DOI: 10.1093/scan/nsab086
PMCID: PMC8847902
PMID: 34651177 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Int J Psychophysiol. 2013 Apr;88(1):1-16. doi: 10.1016/j.ijpsycho.2013.02.001. 
Epub 2013 Feb 13.

Boosting brain functions: Improving executive functions with behavioral 
training, neurostimulation, and neurofeedback.

Enriquez-Geppert S(1), Huster RJ, Herrmann CS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental Psychology, Carl von Ossietzky University, 
Oldenburg, Germany.

Cognitive enhancement is a popular topic, attracting attention both from the 
general public and the scientific research community. Higher cognitive functions 
are involved in various aspects of everyday life and have been associated with 
manifest behavioral and psychiatric mental impairments when deteriorated. The 
improvement of these so-called executive functions (EFs) is of high individual, 
social, and economic relevances. This review provides a synopsis of two lines of 
research, investigating the enhancement of capabilities in executive 
functioning: a) computerized behavioral trainings, and b) approaches for direct 
neuromodulation (neurofeedback and transcranial electrostimulation). Task 
switching, memory updating, response inhibition, and dual task performance are 
addressed in terms of cognitive functions. It has been shown that behavioral 
cognitive training leads to enhanced performance in task switching, memory 
updating, and dual tasks. Similarly, direct neurocognitive modulation of brain 
regions that are crucially involved in specific EFs also leads to behavioral 
benefits in response inhibition, task switching, and memory updating. Response 
inhibition performance has been shown to be improved by neurostimulation of the 
right inferior frontal cortex, whereas neurostimulation of the dorsolateral 
prefrontal cortex exerts effects on task switching and memory updating. Due to a 
lack of consistency in experimental methods and findings, a comparison of 
different training approaches concerning their effectiveness is not yet 
possible. So far, current data suggest that training gains may indeed generalize 
to untrained tasks aiming at the same cognitive process, as well as across 
cognitive domains within executive control.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijpsycho.2013.02.001
PMID: 23415793 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Neuropsychologia. 2010 Jun;48(7):1948-57. doi: 
10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2010.03.015. Epub 2010 Mar 19.

Executive impairment in Parkinson's disease: response automaticity and task 
switching.

Cameron IG(1), Watanabe M, Pari G, Munoz DP.

Author information:
(1)Centre for Neuroscience Studies, Queen's University, Kingston, Ontario, 
Canada K7L 3N6.

Patients with Parkinson's disease (PD) show slowed movement initiation and can 
have deficits in executive function, leading to impairments in controlling 
involuntary behavior. This results in difficulties performing an antisaccade, 
which requires one to suppress an automatic eye movement (a prosaccade) to a 
visual stimulus, and execute a voluntary eye movement in the opposite direction. 
Antisaccade deficits are similar to those seen in task switching, whereby one is 
required to change a response after performing a different behavior. Both 
antisaccade (Hood et al., 2007) and task switching (Cools, Barker, Sahakian, & 
Robbins, 2001) deficits in PD have been attributed to fronto-basal ganglia (BG) 
dysfunction. Previously, we demonstrated with functional magnetic resonance 
imaging that BG circuitry is important to both task switching and voluntary 
saccade generation, as greater caudate activation was seen when healthy young 
adults first prepared a prosaccade, but then switched to an antisaccade 
(Cameron, Coe, et al., 2009). Therefore, we hypothesized that PD patients would 
have difficulty switching from one saccade response to the other, with 
particular impairment in switching from a pro to an antisaccade. Here, we not 
only confirmed this prediction, but also showed that PD patients performed 
better than controls in switching from an anti to a prosaccade. This suggests 
that task switching deficits in PD are particularly pronounced when more 
automatic behavior needs to be overridden with alternative behavior. We suggest 
that this occurs primarily at the level of establishing the appropriate task 
set, which is an internalized rule that governs how to respond.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2010.03.015
PMID: 20303998 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Cereb Cortex. 2016 Apr;26(4):1647-59. doi: 10.1093/cercor/bhu327. Epub 2015 Jan 
19.

Reward Motivation Enhances Task Coding in Frontoparietal Cortex.

Etzel JA(1), Cole MW(2), Zacks JM(1), Kay KN(1), Braver TS(1).

Author information:
(1)Washington University in St Louis, St Louis, MO, USA.
(2)Washington University in St Louis, St Louis, MO, USA Rutgers University, 
Newark, NJ, USA.

Reward motivation often enhances task performance, but the neural mechanisms 
underlying such cognitive enhancement remain unclear. Here, we used a 
multivariate pattern analysis (MVPA) approach to test the hypothesis that 
motivation-related enhancement of cognitive control results from improved 
encoding and representation of task set information. Participants underwent two 
fMRI sessions of cued task switching, the first under baseline conditions, and 
the second with randomly intermixed reward incentive and no-incentive trials. 
Information about the upcoming task could be successfully decoded from 
cue-related activation patterns in a set of frontoparietal regions typically 
associated with task control. More critically, MVPA classifiers trained on the 
baseline session had significantly higher decoding accuracy on incentive than 
non-incentive trials, with decoding improvement mediating reward-related 
enhancement of behavioral performance. These results strongly support the 
hypothesis that reward motivation enhances cognitive control, by improving the 
discriminability of task-relevant information coded and maintained in 
frontoparietal brain regions.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. 
For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/cercor/bhu327
PMCID: PMC4785950
PMID: 25601237 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Int J Psychophysiol. 2006 Jun;60(3):284-91. doi: 10.1016/j.ijpsycho.2005.07.011. 
Epub 2005 Sep 12.

The lateralized readiness potential and P300 of stimulus-set switching.

Hsieh S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, National Chung Cheng University, Ming-Hsiung, 
Taiwan. psyhsl@ccu.edu.tw

The present study aimed at investigating whether stimulus-set switching involves 
the same stages of information processing as response-set switching. A pair-wise 
task switching paradigm in which the trial sequences comprised only two tasks 
was used. The effect of preparation was manipulated so that the participants 
performed only the repeat trials in some blocks and only the switch trials in 
other blocks, or both the repeat and switch trials were randomly mixed within a 
single block. P300 peak latency and stimulus- and response-locked lateralized 
readiness potential intervals were used to indicate the processing stage of 
stimulus identification, response selection and motor execution, respectively. 
The results demonstrated that the stimulus-set switching involves stages of 
information processing following stimulus identification and before motor 
execution.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijpsycho.2005.07.011
PMID: 16157405 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Front Psychol. 2010 Jul 15;1:25. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2010.00025. eCollection 
2010.

Advance preparation in task-switching: converging evidence from behavioral, 
brain activation, and model-based approaches.

Karayanidis F(1), Jamadar S, Ruge H, Phillips N, Heathcote A, Forstmann BU.

Author information:
(1)Functional Neuroimaging Laboratory, School of Psychology and Centre for Brain 
and Mental Health Research, University of Newcastle Newcastle, NSW, Australia.

Recent research has taken advantage of the temporal and spatial resolution of 
event-related brain potentials (ERPs) and functional magnetic resonance imaging 
(fMRI) to identify the time course and neural circuitry of preparatory processes 
required to switch between different tasks. Here we overview some key findings 
contributing to understanding strategic processes in advance preparation. 
Findings from these methodologies are compatible with advance preparation 
conceptualized as a set of processes activated for both switch and repeat 
trials, but with substantial variability as a function of individual differences 
and task requirements. We then highlight new approaches that attempt to 
capitalize on this variability to link behavior and brain activation patterns. 
One approach examines correlations among behavioral, ERP and fMRI measures. A 
second "model-based" approach accounts for differences in preparatory processes 
by estimating quantitative model parameters that reflect latent psychological 
processes. We argue that integration of behavioral and neuroscientific 
methodologies is key to understanding the complex nature of advance preparation 
in task-switching.

DOI: 10.3389/fpsyg.2010.00025
PMCID: PMC3153745
PMID: 21833196


161. PLoS One. 2015 Nov 10;10(11):e0142169. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0142169. 
eCollection 2015.

Working Memory, Reasoning, and Task Switching Training: Transfer Effects, 
Limitations, and Great Expectations?

Baniqued PL(1)(2), Allen CM(1), Kranz MB(1)(2), Johnson K(1), Sipolins A(1)(2), 
Dickens C(3), Ward N(1), Geyer A(3), Kramer AF(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Beckman Institute for Advanced Science and Technology, University of Illinois 
at Urbana Champaign, Urbana, Illinois, United States of America.
(2)Department of Psychology, University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign, Urbana, 
Illinois, United States of America.
(3)Aptima, Inc., Woburn, Massachusetts, United States of America.

Although some studies have shown that cognitive training can produce 
improvements to untrained cognitive domains (far transfer), many others fail to 
show these effects, especially when it comes to improving fluid intelligence. 
The current study was designed to overcome several limitations of previous 
training studies by incorporating training expectancy assessments, an active 
control group, and "Mind Frontiers," a video game-based mobile program comprised 
of six adaptive, cognitively demanding training tasks that have been found to 
lead to increased scores in fluid intelligence (Gf) tests. We hypothesize that 
such integrated training may lead to broad improvements in cognitive abilities 
by targeting aspects of working memory, executive function, reasoning, and 
problem solving. Ninety participants completed 20 hour-and-a-half long training 
sessions over four to five weeks, 45 of whom played Mind Frontiers and 45 of 
whom completed visual search and change detection tasks (active control). After 
training, the Mind Frontiers group improved in working memory n-back tests, a 
composite measure of perceptual speed, and a composite measure of reaction time 
in reasoning tests. No training-related improvements were found in reasoning 
accuracy or other working memory tests, nor in composite measures of episodic 
memory, selective attention, divided attention, and multi-tasking. Perceived 
self-improvement in the tested abilities did not differ between groups. A 
general expectancy difference in problem-solving was observed between groups, 
but this perceived benefit did not correlate with training-related improvement. 
In summary, although these findings provide modest evidence regarding the 
efficacy of an integrated cognitive training program, more research is needed to 
determine the utility of Mind Frontiers as a cognitive training tool.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0142169
PMCID: PMC4640538
PMID: 26555341 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: Charles Dickens is employed 
by Aptima, Inc., which developed the Mind Frontiers game in collaboration with 
University of Illinois researchers Arthur Kramer and Pauline Baniqued. A version 
of Mind Frontiers is currently in use in studies at the University of Illinois 
and Florida State University. Alexandra Geyer was employed by Aptima, Inc. 
during the development and implementation of the current study. She is no longer 
affiliated with the company. There are no patents, further products in 
development or marketed products to declare. This does not alter the authors’ 
adherence to all the PLOS ONE policies on sharing data and materials.


162. J Cogn Neurosci. 2023 Oct 1;35(10):1557-1569. doi: 10.1162/jocn_a_02036.

Association of Intrinsic Functional Connectivity between the Locus Coeruleus and 
Salience Network with Attentional Ability.

Neal J(1), Song I(1), Katz B(1), Lee TH(1).

Author information:
(1)Virginia Tech, Blacksburg.

The locus coeruleus (LC) is a brainstem region associated with broad neural 
arousal because of norepinephrine production, but it has increasingly been 
associated with specific cognitive processes. These include sustained attention, 
with deficits associated with various neuropsychological disorders. Neural 
models of attention deficits have focused on interrupted dynamics between the 
salience network (SAL) with the frontoparietal network, which has been 
associated with task-switching and processing of external stimuli, respectively. 
Conflicting findings for these regions suggest the possibility of upstream 
signaling leading to attention dysfunction, and recent research suggests LC 
involvement. In this study, resting-state functional connectivity and behavioral 
performance on an attention task was examined within 584 individuals. Analysis 
revealed significant clusters connected to LC activity in the SAL. Given 
previous findings that attention deficits may be caused by SAL network switching 
dysfunctions, findings here further suggest that dysfunction in LC-SAL 
connectivity may impair attention.

© 2023 Massachusetts Institute of Technology.

DOI: 10.1162/jocn_a_02036
PMCID: PMC11311826
PMID: 37584586 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors declare to have 
no competing interests with the research conducted here.


163. Addict Biol. 2015 Sep;20(5):979-89. doi: 10.1111/adb.12199. Epub 2014 Dec 5.

Brain function during cognitive flexibility and white matter integrity in 
alcohol-dependent patients, problematic drinkers and healthy controls.

Jansen JM(1), van Holst RJ(1)(2)(3), van den Brink W(1), Veltman DJ(1)(4), Caan 
MW(5), Goudriaan AE(1)(6).

Author information:
(1)Academic Medical Centre, Department of Psychiatry, Amsterdam Institute for 
Addiction Research, The Netherlands.
(2)Donders Institute for Cognition, Brain and Behaviour, Radboud University, The 
Netherlands.
(3)Department of Neurology, Radboud University Medical Centre, The Netherlands.
(4)VU University Medical Center, The Netherlands.
(5)Academic Medical Centre, Department of Radiology, University of Amsterdam, 
The Netherlands.
(6)Arkin Mental Health, The Netherlands.

Cognitive flexibility has been associated with prefrontal white matter (WM) 
integrity in healthy controls (HCs), showing that lower WM integrity is 
associated with worse performance. Although both cognitive flexibility and WM 
integrity have been found to be aberrant in alcohol-dependent (AD) patients, the 
relationship between the two has never been tested. In this study, we 
investigated the association between WM tract density and cognitive flexibility 
in patients with AD (n = 26) and HCs (n = 22). In order to assess the influence 
of AD severity, we also included a group of problematic drinkers (PrDs; n = 23) 
who did not meet the AD criteria. Behavioral responses and brain activity during 
a cognitive flexibility task were measured during functional magnetic resonance 
imaging. Probabilistic fiber tracking was performed between the dorsolateral 
prefrontal cortex and the basal ganglia; two crucial regions for task switching. 
Finally, the task-related functional connectivity between these areas was 
assessed. There were no significant group differences in the task performance. 
However, compared with HCs, AD patients and PrDs showed decreased WM integrity 
and increased prefrontal brain activation during task switching. Evidence is 
presented for a compensatory mechanism, involving recruitment of additional 
prefrontal resources in order to compensate for WM and neural function 
impairments in AD patients and PrDs. Although present in both alcohol groups, 
the PrDs were more successful in invoking this compensatory mechanism when 
compared to the AD patients. We propose that this may therefore serve as a 
protective factor, precluding transition from problematic drinking into alcohol 
dependence.

© 2014 Society for the Study of Addiction.

DOI: 10.1111/adb.12199
PMID: 25477246 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Neurology. 2018 Jan 16;90(3):e197-e205. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000004829. Epub 
2017 Dec 22.

Multiple pathways of reserve simultaneously present in cognitively normal older 
adults.

Oh H(1), Razlighi QR(2), Stern Y(2).

Author information:
(1)From the Cognitive Neuroscience Division, Department of Neurology, Columbia 
University College of Physicians and Surgeons, New York, NY. hwameeoh@gmail.com.
(2)From the Cognitive Neuroscience Division, Department of Neurology, Columbia 
University College of Physicians and Surgeons, New York, NY.

OBJECTIVE: To examine neural correlates of intellectual activity underlying 
multiple pathways imparting reserve by testing that higher intellectual activity 
is associated with lower brain amyloid pathology, greater gray matter (GM) 
volume, and differential task-evoked brain activation levels as a function of 
amyloid positivity status among clinically intact older adults.
METHODS: Eighty-two cognitively normal older adults and 46 healthy young 
participants underwent fMRI during task switching. All older participants 
completed 18F-florbetaben-PET and an individual's amyloid positivity status was 
determined. To assess GM volume, T1-weighted high-resolution structural images 
were processed using voxel-based morphometry. As lifestyle factors, intellectual 
activity was estimated by a composite score of vocabulary, reading ability, and 
years of education.
RESULTS: Across all older participants, intellectual activity was associated 
with lower amyloid deposition in lateral and medial frontoparietal and temporal 
lobes but higher amyloid deposition in superior frontal and parietal cortices, 
larger GM volume across widespread brain regions, and reduced brain activation 
during task switching. These patterns of associations, however, differed by 
amyloid positivity status. While the patterns of associations remained similar 
among amyloid-negative older adults, among amyloid-positive older adults, 
intellectual activity was associated with increased amyloid deposition in 
frontoparietal cortices and increased activation during task.
CONCLUSIONS: Intellectual activity simultaneously exerts both neuroprotective 
and compensatory effects via multiple neural pathways that promote optimal brain 
aging and help maintain normal cognition during amyloid accumulation.

Copyright © 2017 American Academy of Neurology.

DOI: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000004829
PMCID: PMC5772159
PMID: 29273689 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Depress Anxiety. 2020 Jul;37(7):645-656. doi: 10.1002/da.23010. Epub 2020 Apr 6.

Attention shifting in the context of emotional faces: Disentangling neural 
mechanisms of irritability from anxiety.

Kryza-Lacombe M(1), Kiefer C(2), Schwartz KTG(1), Strickland K(2), Wiggins 
JL(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)San Diego State University/University of California, San Diego, Joint 
Doctoral Program in Clinical Psychology, San Diego, California.
(2)Department of Psychology, San Diego State University, San Diego, California.

BACKGROUND: Irritability predicts concurrent and prospective psychiatric 
disorders across the lifespan. Anxiety commonly co-occurs with irritability, and 
such comorbidity complicates care. Understanding the mechanisms of comorbid 
traits is necessary to inform treatment decisions. This study aimed to 
disentangle neural mechanisms of irritability from anxiety in the context of 
attentional shifting toward and away from emotional faces in youths from 
treatment-seeking families.
METHODS: Youths (N = 45), mean age = 14.01 years (standard deviation = 1.89) 
completed a dot-probe task during functional magnetic resonance imaging 
acquisition. Whole-brain activation analyses evaluated the effect of 
irritability on neural reactivity in the context of varying attentional shifting 
toward and away from emotional faces, both depending on and above and beyond 
anxiety (i.e., with anxiety as [a] a moderator and [b] a covariate, 
respectively).
RESULTS: Higher irritability levels related to distinct task-related patterns of 
cuneus activation, depending on comorbid anxiety levels. Increased irritability 
also related to distinct task-related patterns of parietal, temporal, occipital, 
and cerebellar activation, controlling for anxiety. Overall, youths with higher 
levels of irritability evinced more pronounced fluctuations in neural reactivity 
across task conditions.
CONCLUSION: The present study contributes to a literature delineating the unique 
and shared neural mechanisms of overlapping symptom dimensions, which will be 
necessary to ultimately build a brain- and behavior-based nosology that forms 
the basis for more targeted and effective treatments.

© 2020 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/da.23010
PMCID: PMC8312255
PMID: 32253797 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICT OF INTERESTS The authors declare that 
there are no conflict of interests.


166. J Neurosci. 2016 Aug 17;36(33):8551-61. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0358-16.2016.

Higher Intelligence Is Associated with Less Task-Related Brain Network 
Reconfiguration.

Schultz DH(1), Cole MW(2).

Author information:
(1)Center for Molecular and Behavioral Neuroscience, Rutgers University, Newark, 
New Jersey 07102 dhs95@scarletmail.rutgers.edu.
(2)Center for Molecular and Behavioral Neuroscience, Rutgers University, Newark, 
New Jersey 07102.

The human brain is able to exceed modern computers on multiple computational 
demands (e.g., language, planning) using a small fraction of the energy. The 
mystery of how the brain can be so efficient is compounded by recent evidence 
that all brain regions are constantly active as they interact in so-called 
resting-state networks (RSNs). To investigate the brain's ability to process 
complex cognitive demands efficiently, we compared functional connectivity (FC) 
during rest and multiple highly distinct tasks. We found previously that RSNs 
are present during a wide variety of tasks and that tasks only minimally modify 
FC patterns throughout the brain. Here, we tested the hypothesis that, although 
subtle, these task-evoked FC updates from rest nonetheless contribute strongly 
to behavioral performance. One might expect that larger changes in FC reflect 
optimization of networks for the task at hand, improving behavioral performance. 
Alternatively, smaller changes in FC could reflect optimization for efficient 
(i.e., small) network updates, reducing processing demands to improve behavioral 
performance. We found across three task domains that high-performing individuals 
exhibited more efficient brain connectivity updates in the form of smaller 
changes in functional network architecture between rest and task. These smaller 
changes suggest that individuals with an optimized intrinsic network 
configuration for domain-general task performance experience more efficient 
network updates generally. Confirming this, network update efficiency correlated 
with general intelligence. The brain's reconfiguration efficiency therefore 
appears to be a key feature contributing to both its network dynamics and 
general cognitive ability.
SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT: The brain's network configuration varies based on 
current task demands. For example, functional brain connections are organized in 
one way when one is resting quietly but in another way if one is asked to make a 
decision. We found that the efficiency of these updates in brain network 
organization is positively related to general intelligence, the ability to 
perform a wide variety of cognitively challenging tasks well. Specifically, we 
found that brain network configuration at rest was already closer to a wide 
variety of task configurations in intelligent individuals. This suggests that 
the ability to modify network connectivity efficiently when task demands change 
is a hallmark of high intelligence.

Copyright © 2016 the authors 0270-6474/16/368551-11$15.00/0.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0358-16.2016
PMCID: PMC4987432
PMID: 27535904 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Biol Psychiatry. 2024 Sep 1;96(5):390-400. doi: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2024.02.1013. 
Epub 2024 Mar 5.

Isolation of Distinct Networks Driving Action and Cognition in Psychomotor 
Processes.

Moussa-Tooks AB(1), Beermann A(2), Manzanarez Felix K(2), Coleman M(3), Bouix 
S(4), Holt D(5), Lewandowski KE(6), Öngür D(6), Breier A(7), Shenton ME(8), 
Heckers S(9), Walther S(10), Brady RO Jr(11), Ward HB(12).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Vanderbilt University 
Medical Center, Nashville, Tennessee; Department of Psychological and Brain 
Sciences and Program in Neuroscience, Indiana University Bloomington, 
Bloomington, Indiana.
(2)Department of Psychiatry, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Boston, 
Massachusetts.
(3)Department of Psychiatry, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts; 
Department of Psychiatry, Brigham & Women's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts.
(4)Department of Software Engineering and Information Technology, École de 
technologie supérieure, Montréal, Québec, Canada.
(5)Department of Psychiatry, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts; 
Department of Psychiatry, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts.
(6)Department of Psychiatry, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts; 
McLean Hospital, Belmont, Massachusetts.
(7)Department of Psychiatry, Indiana University School of Medicine, 
Indianapolis, Indiana.
(8)Department of Psychiatry, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts; 
Department of Psychiatry, Brigham & Women's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts; 
Department of Radiology, Harvard Medical School and Brigham & Women's Hospital, 
Boston, Massachusetts.
(9)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Vanderbilt University 
Medical Center, Nashville, Tennessee.
(10)University Hospital of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, University of Bern, 
Bern, Switzerland.
(11)Department of Psychiatry, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Boston, 
Massachusetts; Department of Psychiatry, Harvard Medical School, Boston, 
Massachusetts; McLean Hospital, Belmont, Massachusetts.
(12)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Vanderbilt University 
Medical Center, Nashville, Tennessee. Electronic address: 
heather.b.ward@vumc.org.

BACKGROUND: Psychomotor disturbances are observed across psychiatric disorders 
and often manifest as psychomotor slowing, agitation, disorganized behavior, or 
catatonia. Psychomotor function includes both cognitive and motor components, 
but the neural circuits driving these subprocesses and how they relate to 
symptoms have remained elusive for centuries.
METHODS: We analyzed data from the HCP-EP (Human Connectome Project for Early 
Psychosis), a multisite study of 125 participants with early psychosis and 58 
healthy participants with resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging 
and clinical characterization. Psychomotor function was assessed using the 
9-hole pegboard task, a timed motor task that engages mechanical and psychomotor 
components of action, and tasks assessing processing speed and task switching. 
We used multivariate pattern analysis of whole-connectome data to identify brain 
correlates of psychomotor function.
RESULTS: We identified discrete brain circuits driving the cognitive and motor 
components of psychomotor function. In our combined sample of participants with 
psychosis (n = 89) and healthy control participants (n = 52), the strongest 
correlates of psychomotor function (pegboard performance) (p < .005) were 
between a midline cerebellar region and left frontal region and presupplementary 
motor area. Psychomotor function was correlated with both cerebellar-frontal 
connectivity (r = 0.33) and cerebellar-presupplementary motor area connectivity 
(r = 0.27). However, the cognitive component of psychomotor performance (task 
switching) was correlated only with cerebellar-frontal connectivity (r = 0.19), 
whereas the motor component (processing speed) was correlated only with 
cerebellar-presupplementary motor area connectivity (r = 0.15), suggesting 
distinct circuits driving unique subprocesses of psychomotor function.
CONCLUSIONS: We identified cerebellar-cortical circuits that drive distinct 
subprocesses of psychomotor function. Future studies should probe relationships 
between cerebellar connectivity and psychomotor performance using 
neuromodulation.

Copyright © 2024 Society of Biological Psychiatry. Published by Elsevier Inc. 
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2024.02.1013
PMCID: PMC11414019
PMID: 38452884 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: DISCLOSURES The authors report no biomedical 
financial interests or potential conflicts of interest.


168. Neurocase. 2011 Feb;17(1):24-40. doi: 10.1080/13554794.2010.487829. Epub 2010 
Jul 14.

A case of 'task-switching acalculia'.

Domahs F(1), Benke T, Delazer M.

Author information:
(1)Abteilung Klinische Linguistik, Institut für Germanistische 
Sprachwissenschaft, Philipps-Universität Marburg, Germany. 
domahs@staff.uni-marburg.de

In this study we describe a patient (FR) with left frontal lesions due to a 
cerebrovascular disorder of embolic origin. Beyond a general slowness, FR showed 
deficits in simple multiplication only when problems were presented in a mixed 
operations list (multiplication, addition, and subtraction), while no such 
deficits were observed for the same multiplication problems in blocked 
presentation. Deficits were restricted to trials directly affected by a switch 
(increased switch costs), but not to subsequent trials (no increased mixing 
costs). Thus, we provide the first detailed description of a condition which 
could be termed 'task-switching acalculia' in a stroke patient. This case 
highlights the need for mixed operation lists in the diagnosis of acalculia.

DOI: 10.1080/13554794.2010.487829
PMID: 20635305 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Neuroimage. 2010 May 15;51(1):432-49. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2010.01.090. 
Epub 2010 Feb 1.

The spatial and temporal dynamics of anticipatory preparation and response 
inhibition in task-switching.

Jamadar S(1), Hughes M, Fulham WR, Michie PT, Karayanidis F.

Author information:
(1)Functional Neuroimaging Laboratory, University of Newcastle, Australia.

We investigated ERP and fMRI correlates of anticipatory preparation and response 
inhibition in a cued task-switching paradigm with informatively cued, 
non-informatively cued and no-go trials. Cue-locked ERPs showed evidence for a 
multicomponent preparation process. An early cue-locked differential positivity 
was larger for informative vs. non-informative cues and its amplitude correlated 
with differential activity for informatively vs. non-informatively cued trials 
in the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC), consistent with a goal activation 
process. A later differential positivity was larger for informatively cued 
switch vs. repeat trials and its amplitude correlated with informatively cued 
switch vs. repeat activity in the posterior parietal cortex (PPC), compatible 
with a category-response (C-R) rule activation process. No-go trials elicited a 
frontal P3, whose amplitude was negatively correlated with activity in the 
ventrolateral prefrontal cortex (VLPFC) and basal ganglia motor network, 
suggesting that a network responsible for response execution was inhibited in 
the course of a no-go trial. These findings indicate that anticipatory 
preparation in task-switching is comprised of at least two processes: goal 
activation and C-R rule activation. They also support a functional dissociation 
between DLPFC and VLPFC, with the former involved in top-down biasing and the 
latter involved in response inhibition.

Copyright (c) 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2010.01.090
PMID: 20123028 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Soc Cogn Affect Neurosci. 2015 Mar;10(3):381-8. doi: 10.1093/scan/nsu060. Epub 
2014 May 7.

Characterizing switching and congruency effects in the Implicit Association Test 
as reactive and proactive cognitive control.

Hilgard J(1), Bartholow BD(2), Dickter CL(1), Blanton H(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychological Sciences, University of Missouri, Columbia, MO 
65211-2500, Department of Psychology, College of William and Mary, Williamsburg, 
VA 23187-8795, and Department of Psychology, University of Connecticut, Storrs, 
CT 06269-1020, USA.
(2)Department of Psychological Sciences, University of Missouri, Columbia, MO 
65211-2500, Department of Psychology, College of William and Mary, Williamsburg, 
VA 23187-8795, and Department of Psychology, University of Connecticut, Storrs, 
CT 06269-1020, USA BartholowB@missouri.edu.

Recent research has identified an important role for task switching, a cognitive 
control process often associated with executive functioning, in the Implicit 
Association Test (IAT). However, switching does not fully account for IAT 
effects, particularly when performance is scored using more recent d-score 
formulations. The current study sought to characterize multiple control 
processes involved in IAT performance through the use of event-related brain 
potentials (ERPs). Participants performed a race-evaluative IAT while ERPs were 
recorded. Behaviorally, participants experienced superadditive reaction time 
costs of incongruency and task switching, consistent with previous studies. The 
ERP showed a marked medial frontal negativity (MFN) 250-450 ms post-stimulus at 
midline fronto-central locations that were more negative for incongruent than 
congruent trials but more positive for switch than for no-switch trials, 
suggesting separable control processes are engaged by these two factors. Greater 
behavioral IAT bias was associated with both greater switch-related and 
congruency-related ERP activity. Findings are discussed in terms of the Dual 
Mechanisms of Control model of reactive and proactive cognitive control.

© The Author (2014). Published by Oxford University Press. For Permissions, 
please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/scan/nsu060
PMCID: PMC4350479
PMID: 24812074 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Neuroreport. 2018 Jan 17;29(2):123-127. doi: 10.1097/WNR.0000000000000934.

Task switching following 24 h of total sleep deprivation: a functional MRI 
study.

Nakashima A(1), Bouak F(1), Lam Q(1), Smith I(1), Vartanian O(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Defence Research and Development Canada, Toronto Research Centre.
(2)Department of Psychology, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

Task switching is a ubiquitous feature of many human activities that involve 
multitasking. In addition, owing to occupational demands, many individuals are 
required to engage in task switching under various levels of sleep deprivation, 
such as those who work in military and medical contexts. Nevertheless, little is 
known about the effects that sleep loss has on the neural bases of task 
switching. To address this shortcoming, we administered a cued switching task to 
participants following a night of normal sleep and also following a night of 
total sleep deprivation - in counterbalanced order. The behavioral results 
demonstrated a cost (i.e. longer reaction time) both as a function of sleep 
deprivation and task switching. Sleep deprivation resulted in greater activation 
in the frontoparietal network, whereas task switching was correlated with 
greater activation in the thalamus and superior temporal gyrus. However, despite 
increases in fatigue and sleepiness and a reduction in cognitive effectiveness 
(computed from actigraphic data), the reaction time cost associated with 
switching (i.e. switch cost) was not exacerbated by sleep deprivation. The 
results are discussed in terms of the involvement of executive functions in 
mitigating the effects of sleep deprivation on task switching.

DOI: 10.1097/WNR.0000000000000934
PMID: 29194294 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Mult Scler. 2018 Apr;24(5):653-662. doi: 10.1177/1352458517701313. Epub 2017 Mar 
24.

Lesion symptom map of cognitive-postural interference in multiple sclerosis.

Ruggieri S(1), Fanelli F(2), Castelli L(2), Petsas N(3), De Giglio L(2), 
Prosperini L(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology and Psychiatry, Sapienza University of Rome, Rome, 
Italy/Department of Neurosciences, San Camillo Forlanini Hospital, Rome, Italy.
(2)Department of Neurology and Psychiatry, Sapienza University of Rome, Rome, 
Italy.
(3)Department of Neurology and Psychiatry, Sapienza University of Rome, Rome, 
Italy/IRCCS Santa Lucia Foundation, Rome, Italy.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the disease-altered structure-function relationship 
underlying the cognitive-postural interference (CPI) phenomenon in multiple 
sclerosis (MS).
METHODS: We measured postural sway of 96 patients and 48 sex-/age-matched 
healthy controls by force platform in quiet standing (single-task (ST)) while 
performing the Stroop test (dual-task (DT)) to estimate the dual-task cost (DTC) 
of balance. In patient group, binary T2 and T1 lesion masks and their 
corresponding lesion volumes were obtained from magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) 
of brain. Normalized brain volume (NBV) was also estimated by SIENAX. 
Correlations between DTC and lesion location were determined by voxel-based 
lesion symptom mapping (VLSM) analyses.
RESULTS: Patients had greater DTC than controls ( p < 0.001). Among whole brain 
MRI metrics, only T1 lesion volume correlated with DTC ( r = -0.27; p < 0.01). 
However, VLSM analysis did not reveal any association with DTC using T1 lesion 
masks. By contrast, we found clusters of T2 lesions in distinct anatomical 
regions (anterior and superior corona radiata, bilaterally) to be correlated 
with DTC ( p < 0.01 false discovery rate (FDR)-corrected). A multivariable 
stepwise regression model confirmed findings from VLSM analysis. NBV did not 
contribute to fit the model.
CONCLUSION: Our findings suggest that the CPI phenomenon in MS can be explained 
by disconnection along specific areas implicated in task-switching abilities and 
divided attention.

DOI: 10.1177/1352458517701313
PMCID: PMC5946662
PMID: 28337941 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Conflicting Interests: The 
author(s) declared the following potential conflicts of interest with respect to 
the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article: Serena Ruggieri 
received speaking honoraria from Merck Serono and Teva. Fulvia Fanelli has 
nothing to disclose. Letizia Castelli received consulting fees from Almirall. 
Nikolaos Petsas received speaking honoraria from Biogen. Laura De Giglio 
received travel grants from Biogen, Novartis, and Teva. Luca Prosperini received 
consulting fees from Biogen, Genzyme, and Novartis; speaking honoraria from 
Biogen, Genzyme, Merck Serono, Novartis, and Teva; and travel grants from 
Biogen, Genzyme, and Teva.


173. J Neurosci. 2012 Dec 12;32(50):18253-8. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0737-12.2012.

Switch-related and general preparation processes in task-switching: evidence 
from multivariate pattern classification of EEG data.

Mansfield EL(1), Karayanidis F, Cohen MX.

Author information:
(1)School of Psychology, University of Newcastle, Callaghan, New South Wales, 
Australia, 2308.

The cued-trials task-switching paradigm is used to investigate the processes 
involved in preparation to change task. Task switch trials typically show poorer 
performance than task repeat trials, suggesting that additional or more 
time-consuming preparation processes are required to switch tasks. However, 
behavioral and neuroimaging studies have so far been unable to decipher whether 
preparing for a switch in task involves distinct cognitive processes to those 
required more generally on both switch and repeat trials. The current study 
addresses this question using a novel multivariate pattern misclassification 
analysis of frequency band-specific local topographical patterns in human EEG 
activity that was elicited by cues varying in information value. Within the 
alpha frequency band, misclassification analysis produced evidence for an early 
switch-related preparation process over right frontal cortex, as well as a later 
task readiness preparation process over right parietal cortex. This represents 
compelling evidence for dissociable switch-related and task readiness 
preparation processes that show distinct time course and spatial activation 
patterns.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0737-12.2012
PMCID: PMC6621749
PMID: 23238739 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


174. Int J Psychophysiol. 2008 Jul;69(1):52-60. doi: 10.1016/j.ijpsycho.2008.02.009. 
Epub 2008 Mar 6.

Cardiovascular fitness and executive control during task-switching: an ERP 
study.

Scisco JL(1), Leynes PA, Kang J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Clemson University, 420 Brackett Hall, Clemson, SC 
29634, USA. jscisco@clemson.edu

Cardiovascular fitness recently has been linked to executive control function in 
older adults. The present study examined the relationship between cardiovascular 
fitness and executive control in young adults using event-related potentials 
(ERPs). Participants completed a two-part experiment. In part one, a graded 
exercise test (GXT) was administered using a cycle ergometer to obtain VO(2)max, 
a measure of maximal oxygen uptake. High-fit participants had VO(2)max measures 
at or above the 70th percentile based on age and sex, and low-fit participants 
had VO(2)max measures at or below the 30th percentile. In part two, a 
task-switching paradigm was used to investigate executive control. 
Task-switching trials produced slower response times and greater amplitude for 
both the P3a and P3b components of the ERP relative to a non-switch trial block. 
No ERP components varied as a function of fitness group. These findings, 
combined with results from previous research, suggest that the relationship 
between greater cardiovascular fitness and better cognitive function emerges 
after early adulthood.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijpsycho.2008.02.009
PMID: 18417237 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Brain Res. 2006 Aug 11;1105(1):73-82. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2006.03.030. Epub 
2006 Apr 21.

Movement-related EEG indices of preparation in task switching and motor control.

de Jong R(1), Gladwin TE, 't Hart BM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, School for Behavioral and Cognitive Neurosciences, 
University of Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands. Ritske.de.jong@rug.nl

Lateralized readiness potential (LRP) and time-frequency domain LRP-type 
measures, called motor-related amplitude asymmetries (MRAA), in the mu band 
(9-13 Hz; mu-MRAA) and the beta band (18-26 Hz; beta-MRAA) were used to study 
the time course of preparation in a task-switching task and a response precuing 
task. Several dissociations between LRP and mu-MRAA and beta-MRAA were found. 
Mu-MRAA and beta-MRAA, but not LRP, exhibited an early and strong reversal in 
cortical lateralization when advance preparation for a switch of response hand 
was required. LRP, but not mu-MRAA or beta-MRAA, was sensitive to manipulation 
of the probability that advance preparation of response hand would be useful in 
a response precuing task. These dissociations replicate earlier findings and 
suggest that movement-related cortical rhythms and cortical potentials are 
associated with distinct preparatory component processes that differ in terms of 
level of abstraction and effort, in line with similar functional distinctions 
between component processes underlying executive control in task switching. This 
suggests that a fine-grained analysis of subprocesses involved in motor control 
may provide important guiding principles for the study and understanding of 
levels and mechanisms of cognitive control.

DOI: 10.1016/j.brainres.2006.03.030
PMID: 16630582 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Eur J Neurosci. 2008 Sep;28(5):1016-29. doi: 10.1111/j.1460-9568.2008.06372.x. 
Epub 2008 Aug 20.

Neurophysiological signature of effective anticipatory task-set control: a 
task-switching investigation.

Lavric A(1), Mizon GA, Monsell S.

Author information:
(1)School of Psychology, Washington Singer Labs, University of Exeter, Exeter, 
UK.

Changing between cognitive tasks requires a reorganization of cognitive 
processes. Behavioural evidence suggests this can occur in advance of the 
stimulus. However, the existence or detectability of an anticipatory task-set 
reconfiguration process remains controversial, in part because several 
neuroimaging studies have not detected extra brain activity during preparation 
for a task switch relative to a task repeat. In contrast, electrophysiological 
studies have identified potential correlates of preparation for a task switch, 
but their interpretation is hindered by the scarcity of evidence on their 
relationship to performance. We aimed to: (i) identify the brain potential(s) 
reflecting effective preparation for a task-switch in a task-cuing paradigm that 
shows clear behavioural evidence for advance preparation, and (ii) characterize 
this activity by means of temporal segmentation and source analysis. Our results 
show that when advance preparation was effective (as indicated by fast 
responses), a protracted switch-related component, manifesting itself as 
widespread posterior positivity and concurrent right anterior negativity, 
preceded stimulus onset for approximately 300 ms, with sources primarily in the 
left lateral frontal, right inferior frontal and temporal cortices. When advance 
preparation was ineffective (as implied by slow responses), or made impossible 
by a short cue-stimulus interval (CSI), a similar component, with lateral 
prefrontal generators, peaked approximately 300 ms poststimulus. The protracted 
prestimulus component (which we show to be distinct from P3 or contingent 
negative variation, CNV) also correlated over subjects with a behavioural 
measure of preparation. Furthermore, its differential lateralization for word 
and picture cues was consistent with a role for verbal self-instruction in 
preparatory task-set reconfiguration.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1460-9568.2008.06372.x
PMID: 18717737 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Neuroreport. 2015 Feb 11;26(3):124-30. doi: 10.1097/WNR.0000000000000310.

Conflict monitoring and adjustment in the task-switching paradigm under 
different memory load conditions: an ERP/sLORETA analysis.

Deng Y(1), Wang Y, Ding X, Tang YY.

Author information:
(1)aSchool of Physics and Optoelectronic Engineering, Institute of 
Neuroinformatics, Dalian University of Technology bInterdisciplinary Center for 
Social and Behavioral Studies, Dongbei University of Finance and Economics 
cCentre for Psychological Health & Education, Dalian Nationalities University, 
Dalian, China dDepartment of Psychological Sciences, Texas Tech University, 
Lubbock, Texas, USA.

The aim of the present study was to examine electrophysiological and behavioral 
changes caused by different memory loads in a task-switching paradigm. A total 
of 31 healthy individuals were subjected to a task, in which the 
stimulus-response reversal paradigm was combined with the task-switching 
paradigm. The event-related potentials were recorded and the N2 component, an 
index of conflict processing, was measured. In addition, the neural sources of 
N2 were further analyzed by standardized low-resolution brain electromagnetic 
tomography. The event-related potential results showed that high memory load 
triggered a higher N2 mean amplitude. Moreover, the standardized low-resolution 
brain electromagnetic tomography data showed that high memory load caused an 
increase in current densities at the anterior cingulate cortex and the 
prefrontal cortex in the task-switching paradigm. In summary, our findings 
provide electrophysiological evidence to interpret possible influences of memory 
loads on conflict monitoring and modulation during the task switching. These 
results imply that the working memory load overrules the influence of 
task-switching performance on the intensification of cognitive control.

DOI: 10.1097/WNR.0000000000000310
PMID: 25569792 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Brain Res. 2009 Feb 19;1255:122-31. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2008.11.103. Epub 
2008 Dec 16.

Electrophysiological evidence of the adaptive task-set inhibition in task 
switching.

Hsieh S(1), Liu H.

Author information:
(1)Cognitive Electrophysiology Laboratory, Department of Psychology, National 
Chung Cheng University, 168 University Road, Min-Hsiung, Chia-Yi, 621, Taiwan. 
psyhsl@ccu.edu.tw

The present study aimed to employ an electrophysiological approach to evaluate 
the adaptive task-set inhibition hypothesis. According to the adaptive task-set 
inhibition hypothesis, task switching should depend on whether the previous 
trial is univalent or bivalent. This study employed a pairwise task-switching 
paradigm. We focused on the second stimulus of a task pair and examined whether 
its event-related potential (ERP) can be modulated as a function of the 
preceding stimulus type (i.e., whether the first stimulus of a task pair is 
univalent or bivalent). Although the reaction time (RT) data in this study 
indicated that the previous stimulus type did not affect the subsequent 
stimulus' performance, we found that the Stimulus 2-locked ERP data could be 
modulated as a function of the Stimulus 1 type--univalent or bivalent. More 
importantly, the effect of Task 2 transition occurred only when the Stimulus 1 
type was bivalent, as seen in the P3b time-range ERP modulation. Therefore, the 
current ERP results provide evidence of the adaptive task-set inhibition.

DOI: 10.1016/j.brainres.2008.11.103
PMID: 19111680 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Neuropsychologia. 2005;43(6):943-52. doi: 
10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2004.08.008.

Internally generated and directly cued task sets: an investigation with fMRI.

Forstmann BU(1), Brass M, Koch I, von Cramon DY.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Max Planck Institute for Human Cognitive and Brain 
Sciences, Leipzig, Germany. forstman@cbs.mpg.de

It is widely acknowledged that the prefrontal cortex (PFC) plays a major role 
for goal-directed behaviour. In this context it is usually necessary to 
coordinate environmental information and internally represented intentions. Such 
goal-directed "endogenous control processes" can be investigated with the 
task-switching paradigm in which participants are required to alternate between 
different tasks. In the present study, we aimed at investigating different 
degrees of endogenous control by introducing two cue types with varying 
directness of the cue-task association. The "transition cues" informed the 
participants about repeating or switching the task but not about the task 
identity. Contrary to that, the "task cues" were directly associated with the 
upcoming task set. Since the transition cues are not directly associated with 
the task set they should require a higher demand of endogenous control than the 
task cues. The comparison of both cue types revealed frontolateral as well as 
frontomedian activations for the transition cue. We assume that the 
frontolateral activation reflects the coordination of information within working 
memory (WM) and the frontomedian cortex reflects the higher demand for 
endogenous control. Furthermore, regions of interest (ROIs) analyses indicate an 
important role for anterior regions along the left inferior frontal sulcus and 
frontomedian wall. This is suggested to reflect a functional gradient in 
anterior-posterior direction which is linked to the relative degree of required 
endogenous control.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2004.08.008
PMID: 15716164 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Cogn Neurosci. 2020 Jul-Oct;11(4):229-238. doi: 10.1080/17588928.2020.1813699. 
Epub 2020 Oct 10.

Structural variation within the left globus pallidus is associated with 
task-switching, not stimulus updating or distractor filtering.

Zacharopoulos G(1)(2), Klingberg T(2), Cohen Kadosh R(1).

Author information:
(1)Wellcome Centre for Integrative Neuroimaging, Department of Experimental 
Psychology, University of Oxford , Oxford, UK.
(2)Department of Neuroscience, Karolinska Institute , Stockholm, Sweden.

Cognitive control is a pivotal aspect of cognition and it is impaired in many 
clinical populations. To date, several distinct types of cognitive control have 
been proposed, and prior work demonstrated the instrumental role of basal 
ganglia, frontal and parietal regions. However, the role of the structural 
variation of these regions in cognitive control functions is poorly understood. 
Here, we examined in 39 adults the association between regional brain volume and 
three major types of cognitive control: (i) stimulus updating, (ii) 
task-switching, and (iii) distractor filtering. The volume of the globus 
pallidus was positively correlated with individual variation in task-switching , 
and was anatomically specific to the left hemisphere. Importantly, this region 
did not track performance in distractor filtering or stimulus updating. We then 
aimed to use transcranial direct current stimulation to target the left midline 
subcortical structures. However, we did not find an effect on task-switching. 
While the null effect in the brain stimulation prevents us from drawing causal 
inference from the role of globus pallidus on task-switching, our structural 
results reveal a novel and highly specific neurostructural mechanism for 
task-switching and provide a further understanding of the link between cognitive 
control functions and the human brain.

DOI: 10.1080/17588928.2020.1813699
PMCID: PMC7657600
PMID: 33040664 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: RCK serves on the scientific advisory boards of 
Neuroelectrics Inc. and Tech InnoSphere Engineering Ltd.


181. Neurosci Res. 1999 Apr;33(4):317-23. doi: 10.1016/s0168-0102(99)00022-x.

Neuronal substrates participating in attentional set-shifting of rules for 
visually guided motor selection: a functional magnetic resonance imaging 
investigation.

Omori M(1), Yamada H, Murata T, Sadato N, Tanaka M, Ishii Y, Isaki K, Yonekura 
Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuropsychiatry, Fukui Medical University, Matsuoka, Japan. 
oasam@fmsrsa.fukui-med.ac.jp

To investigate the neuronal substrates participating in attentional set-shifting 
for motor selection rules, a functional magnetic resonance imaging study was 
performed during hand-shape selection tasks. During the session, six 
right-handed subjects were required to make one of three hand-shapes using their 
right hands, in response to the hand-shape images on a video screen, following 
one of the three predefined rules of win, lose, and tie. The selection rules 
were consistently applied in three conditions (win, tie, and lose), and changed 
alternately in one condition (alternate win-lose). Thus the alternate win-lose 
condition requires the shift of rules for motor selection. This alternate 
condition compared with the win, tie, and lose conditions showed activation in 
the left middle frontal gyrus, the bilateral inferior frontal gyri, and the left 
posterior fusiform and lingual gyri. These activation patterns in the prefrontal 
cortex were similar to those observed during the performance of the Wisconsin 
Card Sorting Test (WCST), which requires a typical set-shifting ability from one 
perceptual dimension to another (Berman et al., 1995. Neuropsychologia 33, 
1027-1046; Nagahama et al., 1996. Brain 119, 1667-1675; Konishi et al., 1998. 
Nature Neuroscience 1, 80-84.). Our data may indicate that the dorsolateral 
prefrontal cortex including the middle and inferior frontal gyri are important 
in attentional set-shifting of both perceptual and non-perceptual 
characteristics. Another activation in the fusiform and lingual gyri may have 
reflected the increased attentional demand for visual processing in the light of 
a current rule for motor selection.

DOI: 10.1016/s0168-0102(99)00022-x
PMID: 10401985 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Can J Diabetes. 2023 Apr;47(3):250-256. doi: 10.1016/j.jcjd.2023.01.004. Epub 
2023 Jan 13.

Changes in Cognition and Brain Function After 26 Weeks of Progressive Resistance 
Training in Older Adults at Risk for Diabetes: A Pilot Randomized Controlled 
Trial.

Furlano JA(1), Horst BR(2), Petrella RJ(3), Shoemaker JK(4), Nagamatsu LS(4).

Author information:
(1)Neuroscience, Schulich School of Medicine and Dentistry, Western University, 
London, Ontario, Canada. Electronic address: jfurlano@uwo.ca.
(2)Neuroscience, Schulich School of Medicine and Dentistry, Western University, 
London, Ontario, Canada.
(3)Department of Family Practice, Faculty of Medicine, University of British 
Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.
(4)School of Kinesiology, Faculty of Health Sciences, Western University, 
London, Ontario, Canada.

OBJECTIVES: Type 2 diabetes is associated with deficits in cognition and brain 
health. Individuals with at least 1 risk factor for diabetes (i.e. obesity, 
prediabetes) already experience some neurocognitive impairment and are at risk 
for further decline. One way to combat these deficits is through exercise, but 
it is unknown whether resistance exercise can improve these functions in this 
at-risk group.
METHODS: This study was a pilot randomized controlled trial. Participants were 
60 to 80 years of age and had prediabetes (fasting capillary glucose 6.1 to 6.9 
mmol/L) and/or were living with overweight or obesity (body mass index ≥25 
kg/m2). Participants completed resistance training or balance and stretching 
exercises (control) thrice weekly for 6 months. Neuropsychological tests were 
used to assess cognitive ability, whereas functional magnetic resonance imaging 
was used to examine brain activation patterns.
RESULTS: Resistance training led to improvements in task-switching, attention, 
and conflict resolution, as well as improved patterns of brain activation that 
may mimic healthy older adults.
CONCLUSIONS: Resistance exercise may serve as an effective behavioural strategy 
to improve neurocognition in older adults at risk for type 2 diabetes. A 
large-scale powered trial is needed to further explore these findings.

Copyright © 2023 Canadian Diabetes Association. Published by Elsevier Inc. All 
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jcjd.2023.01.004
PMID: 36858923 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Brain Res Cogn Brain Res. 2005 Feb;22(2):165-75. doi: 
10.1016/j.cogbrainres.2004.08.006.

The nature of switch cost: task set configuration or carry-over effect?

Hsieh S(1), Liu LC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, National Chung Cheng University, 160 San-Hsing, 
Ming-Hsiung, Chia-Yi 621, Taiwan. psyhsl@ccu.edu.tw

The primary goal of the present study was to differentiate variants of each 
class of hypothetical models of task switching. Two event-related potentials, 
the lateralized readiness potential (LRP) and P300 were analyzed to infer the 
roles of advance reconfiguration and carry-over effect upon task switching. 
Participants performed two tasks in a random order, so that on each trial, they 
either repeated the task from the previous trial or switched to another task. 
Pre-cues that preceded each stimulus were either informative (task-cueing 
conditions), specifying which of the two tasks to perform, or uninformative (no 
task-cueing conditions). The results showed that the mean reaction time (RT) and 
the interval between stimulus onset and LRP onset were longer for switch than 
for repeat trials. This suggested that task switching affected processes before 
LRP onset (including stimulus identification and response selection). A further 
analysis of P300 confined task switching to the process after the stimulus 
identification stage. Task cueing, meanwhile, influenced both the latency and 
peak amplitude of P300, suggesting that the cueing effect occurred prior to the 
response selection stage. The model of configuration-execution with moderate 
modifications is a candidate to explain the present results.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cogbrainres.2004.08.006
PMID: 15653291 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Neuroimage. 2014 Jan 1;84:191-205. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2013.08.047. Epub 
2013 Aug 30.

The neural mechanisms underlying internally and externally guided task 
selection.

Orr JM(1), Banich MT.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Cognitive Science, University of Colorado Boulder, USA. 
Electronic address: Joseph.Orr@colorado.edu.

While some prior work suggests that medial prefrontal cortex (MFC) regions 
mediate freely chosen actions, other work suggests that the lateral frontal pole 
(LFP) is responsible for control of abstract, internal goals. The present study 
uses fMRI to determine whether the voluntary selection of a task in pursuit of 
an overall goal relies on MFC regions or the LFP. To do so, we used a modified 
voluntary task switching (VTS) paradigm, in which participants choose an 
individual task to perform on each trial (i.e., a subgoal), under instructions 
to perform the tasks equally often and in a random order (i.e. the overall 
goal). In conjunction, we examined patterns of activation in the face of 
irrelevant, but task-related external stimuli that might nonetheless influence 
task selection. While there was some evidence that the MFC was involved in 
voluntary task selection, we found that the LFP and anterior insula (AI) were 
crucial to task selection in the pursuit of an overall goal. In addition, 
activation of the LFP and AI increased in the face of environmental stimuli that 
might serve as an interfering or conflicting external bias on voluntary task 
choice. These findings suggest that the LFP supports task selection according to 
abstract, internal goals, and leaves open the possibility that MFC may guide 
action selection in situations lacking in such top-down biases. As such, the 
current study represents a critical step towards understanding the neural 
underpinnings of how tasks are selected voluntarily to enable an overarching 
goal.

© 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2013.08.047
PMCID: PMC3849139
PMID: 23994316 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Can J Exp Psychol. 2011 Mar;65(1):38-47. doi: 10.1037/a0022810.

When goals collide: the interaction between prospective memory and task 
switching.

West R(1), Scolaro AJ, Bailey K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Iowa State University, Ames, IA 50010, USA. 
rwest@iastate.edu

The neural correlates of prospective retrieval mode, and the basis of the 
interaction between prospective memory (PM) and task switching, were examined 
using event-related brain potentials (ERPs). In two experiments individuals 
performed pure and mixed blocks of trials where they indicated whether or not a 
word was a noun or a verb or contained one or two vowels based upon a cue that 
was presented before the target stimulus. Experiment 1 revealed that prospective 
retrieval mode was associated with slow wave activity over the frontal and 
posterior regions of the scalp that differed in topography depending upon 
whether the PM cues were embedded in pure or mixed blocks of trials. This 
experiment also revealed that the neural correlates of task set configuration, 
but not cue encoding, were sensitive to PM load. These data indicate that PM 
load may effect task switching by influencing an individual's ability to 
maintain multiple task sets in working memory and to efficiently implement a 
given task set to guide task performance. Additionally, task switching may 
effect PM by influencing the degree to which individuals rely on 
stimulus-independent and stimulus-oriented processing to support the realization 
of delayed intentions.

(PsycINFO Database Record (c) 2011 APA, all rights reserved).

DOI: 10.1037/a0022810
PMID: 21443329 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Eur J Neurosci. 2003 Oct;18(8):2408-12. doi: 10.1046/j.1460-9568.2003.02937.x.

Attention capture by auditory significant stimuli: semantic analysis follows 
attention switching.

Escera C(1), Yago E, Corral MJ, Corbera S, Nuñez MI.

Author information:
(1)Neurodynamics Laboratory, Department of Psychiatry and Clinical 
Psychobiology, University of Barcelona, P. Vall d'Hebron 171, 08035 Barcelona, 
Spain. cescera@psi.ub.es

Event-related potentials (ERPs) were recorded from the scalp to investigate a 
long-standing controversy in auditory attention research, namely when the 
'breakthrough of the unattended' takes place in the human brain. Nine subjects 
classified visual stimuli appearing 300 ms after task-irrelevant standard tones 
(80%, i.e. P = 0.8) or novel sounds (20%, i.e. P = 0.2) into odd/even 
categories. After the recording session, subjects scored the novel sounds as to 
whether they had any particular meaning (identifiable) or were perceived as a 
burst of noise (non-identifiable), and performance and ERPs were analysed 
according to this classification. A control condition, in which the visual 
stimuli were presented with no sounds, showed that subjects covertly monitored 
the task-irrelevant sounds during visual task-performance, and a further 
condition, in which the auditory and visual stimuli appeared regardless of each 
other, made it possible to trace the processing of the distracters during 
allocation of attention outside the auditory environment. Results yielded 
identical N1-enhancement for the two types of novel sounds, indicating similar 
attention switching triggered to these two types of unexpected sounds. However, 
there was a stronger orientating of attention towards identifiable novel sounds, 
as indicated both by behavioural distraction and by larger novelty-P3. 
Furthermore, this stronger orientating of attention was due to the sounds being 
contingent on the visual stimuli, as no increase in novelty-P3 to identifiable 
novel sounds was observed in the control condition, in which the sounds occurred 
outside the attentional set. Therefore, provided that the N1-enhancement 
reflects a call for focal attention, and novelty-P3 the effective orientating of 
attention towards the eliciting sounds, the present results suggest that 
semantic analysis of significant sounds occurs after a transitory switch of 
attention towards the eliciting stimuli. Moreover, as the novelty-P3 increase in 
amplitude was observed only when subjects covertly monitored the sounds, the 
present data suggest that semantic analysis of irrelevant sounds depends on the 
top-down cognitive influences of the attentional set.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1460-9568.2003.02937.x
PMID: 14622204 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2000 Nov 21;97(24):13448-53. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.240460497.

The role of prefrontal cortex and posterior parietal cortex in task switching.

Sohn MH(1), Ursu S, Anderson JR, Stenger VA, Carter CS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Carnegie-Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, 
USA. mhsohn@andrew.cmu.edu

Erratum in
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2001 Mar 27;98(7):4276.

Human ability to switch from one cognitive task to another involves both 
endogenous preparation without an external stimulus and exogenous adjustment in 
response to the external stimulus. In an event-related functional MRI study, 
participants performed pairs of two tasks that are either the same (task 
repetition) or different (task switch) from each other. On half of the trials, 
foreknowledge about task repetition or task switch was available. On the other 
half, it was not. Endogenous preparation seems to involve lateral prefrontal 
cortex (BA 46/45) and posterior parietal cortex (BA 40). During preparation, 
higher activation increases in inferior lateral prefrontal cortex and superior 
posterior parietal cortex were associated with foreknowledge than with no 
foreknowledge. Exogenous adjustment seems to involve superior prefrontal cortex 
(BA 8) and posterior parietal cortex (BA 39/40) in general. During a task switch 
with no foreknowledge, activations in these areas were relatively higher than 
during a task repetition with no foreknowledge. These results suggest that 
endogenous preparation and exogenous adjustment for a task switch may be 
independent processes involving different brain areas.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.240460497
PMCID: PMC27244
PMID: 11069306 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Neuroimage. 2003 Dec;20(4):2322-42. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2003.08.010.

Task switching: a high-density electrical mapping study.

Wylie GR(1), Javitt DC, Foxe JJ.

Author information:
(1)The Cognitive Neurophysiology Laboratory, Program in Cognitive Neuroscience 
and Schizophrenia, Nathan S Kline Institute for Psychiatric Research, 140 Old 
Orangeburg Road, Orangeburg, NY 10962, USA.

Flexibly switching between tasks is one of the paradigmatic functions of 
so-called "executive control" processes. Neuroimaging studies have implicated 
both prefrontal and parietal cortical regions in the processing necessary to 
effectively switch task. Beyond their general involvement in this critical 
function, however, little is known about the dynamics of processing across 
frontal and parietal regions. For instance, it remains to be determined to what 
extent these areas play a role in preparing to switch task before arrival of the 
stimulus to be acted upon and to what extent they play a role in any switching 
processes that occur after the stimulus is presented. Here, we used the 
excellent temporal resolution afforded by high-density mapping of brain 
potentials to explore the time course of the processes underlying (1) the 
performance of and (2) the preparation for a switch of task. We detail the 
contributions of both frontal and parietal processes to these two aspects of the 
task-switching process. Our data revealed a complex pattern of effects. Most 
striking was a period of sustained activity over bilateral parietal regions 
preceding the switch trial. Over frontal regions, activity actually decreased 
during this same period. Strongest sustained frontal activity was in fact seen 
for trials on which no switch was required. Further, we find that the first 
differential activity associated with switching task was over posterior parietal 
areas (220 ms), whereas over frontal scalp, the first differential activity is 
found more than 200 ms later. These and other effects are interpreted in terms 
of a "competition" model in which preparing to switch task is understood as the 
beginning of a competition between the potentially relevant tasks that is 
resolved during the switch trial. Our findings are difficult to account for with 
models that posit a strong role for frontal cortical regions in "reconfiguring" 
the system during switches of task.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2003.08.010
PMID: 14683733 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Cogn Affect Behav Neurosci. 2012 Dec;12(4):661-70. doi: 
10.3758/s13415-012-0118-6.

Brain activity related to the ability to inhibit previous task sets: an fMRI 
study.

Whitmer AJ(1), Banich MT.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Stanford University, CA, USA. whitmera@stanford.edu

Switching between tasks requires individuals to inhibit mental representations 
of the previous task demands and to activate representations of the new demands. 
To date, investigators have identified only one way to measure task set 
inhibition-that is, through a backward inhibition (BI) paradigm. In this 
paradigm, participants take more time to return to a task set that was recently 
abandoned (e.g., "A" in an ABA task sequence) than to a nonrecently abandoned 
task set (e.g., CBA), and investigators have demonstrated that this time cost 
reflects time needed to overcome the inhibition of the recently abandoned task 
set. To date, however, investigators have not been able to use this paradigm, or 
any other, to isolate brain activity related to task set inhibition. For 
example, contrasting the brain activity elicited by ABA and CBA trials will not 
isolate activity related to task set inhibition, because inhibition occurs 
during the initial switch away from task A (i.e., ABA). Given that there is 
currently no way to directly isolate the brain activity related to task set 
inhibition, we decided instead to examine how brain activity during task 
switching varies in individuals who are better than others at inhibiting the 
previous task set. We found that participants who were good at inhibiting 
previous task sets, as measured with the BI paradigm, exhibited more activity in 
the basal ganglia and supplementary motor area/premotor area when task 
switching, as measured via functional magnetic resonance imaging. These findings 
suggest that activity in these regions plays a role in task set inhibition.

DOI: 10.3758/s13415-012-0118-6
PMID: 22956332 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Neuropsychologia. 2015 May;71:225-35. doi: 
10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2015.04.008. Epub 2015 Apr 8.

Longitudinal alterations to brain function, structure, and cognitive performance 
in healthy older adults: A fMRI-DTI study.

Hakun JG(1), Zhu Z(1), Brown CA(1), Johnson NF(2), Gold BT(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology, USA.
(2)Department of Rehabilitation Sciences, USA.
(3)Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology, USA; Magnetic Resonance Imaging and 
Spectroscopy Center, USA; Sanders-Brown Center on Aging, University of Kentucky, 
Lexington, KY 40536, USA. Electronic address: brian.gold@uky.edu.

Cross-sectional research has shown that older adults tend to have different 
frontal cortex activation patterns, poorer brain structure, and lower task 
performance than younger adults. However, relationships between longitudinal 
changes in brain function, brain structure, and cognitive performance in older 
adults are less well understood. Here we present the results of a longitudinal, 
combined fMRI-DTI study in cognitive normal (CN) older adults. A two time-point 
study was conducted in which participants completed a task switching paradigm 
while fMRI data was collected and underwent the identical scanning protocol an 
average of 3.3 years later (SD=2 months). We observed longitudinal fMRI 
activation increases in bilateral regions of lateral frontal cortex at time 
point 2. These fMRI activation increases were associated with longitudinal 
declines in WM microstructure in a portion of the corpus callosum connecting the 
increasingly recruited frontal regions. In addition, the fMRI activation 
increase in the left VLPFC was associated with longitudinal increases in 
response latencies. Taken together, our results suggest that local frontal 
activation increases in CN older adults may in part reflect a response to 
reduced inter-hemispheric signaling mechanisms.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2015.04.008
PMCID: PMC4417375
PMID: 25862416 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Fiziol Cheloveka. 2015 Nov-Dec;41(6):49-64.

[Sex Differences in Visual Task Switching (an fMRI Study)].

[Article in Russian]

Kuptsova SV, Ivanova MV, Petrushevsky AG, Fedina ON, Zhavoronkova LA.

Executive functions are an important ability of human brain to program, regulate 
and control various cognitive processes; one of these processes is the voluntary 
task switching. However, the sex differences in this process are poorly studied. 
In our study, these differences were investigated in 70 healthy subjects (36 men 
and 34 women) aged 21-48 years by means of functional magnetic resonance imaging 
(fMRI) and neuropsychological examination. During the fM RI study, the subjects 
had to shift their attention between two tasks (classifying figures according to 
their form or number). During neuropsychological examination, the subjects 
completed a series of visual attention, task switching and memory tests. The 
results of fMRI study showed that visual task switching in women is carried out 
by a neuronal network, consisting of dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, inferior 
parietal areas, secondary visual areas of both hemispheres and cerebellum 
cortex. Task switching in men involved the same areas and, in addition, right 
supplementary motor area, right insula and left thalamus. As compared with 
women, the rate of activation of prefrontal cortex, left parietal lobe and right 
insula in men was significantly higher. The results of neuropsychological tests 
showed that men completed the tasks with attention switching, searching and 
arranging of stimuli significantly slower than women. The data demonstrate the 
differences in the organization of task switching processes in men and women.

PMID: 26859988 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Mol Psychiatry. 2024 Jan;29(1):74-84. doi: 10.1038/s41380-023-02302-w. Epub 2023 
Oct 27.

Modelling the overlap and divergence of autistic and schizotypal traits on 
hippocampal subfield volumes and regional cerebral blood flow.

Nenadić I(1)(2)(3), Meller T(4)(5), Evermann U(4)(5), Pfarr JK(4)(5), Federspiel 
A(6)(7), Walther S(6), Grezellschak S(4)(5)(8), Abu-Akel A(9)(10).

Author information:
(1)Cognitive Neuropsychiatry Lab, Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, 
Philipps Universität Marburg, Marburg, Germany. nenadic@staff.uni-marburg.de.
(2)Center for Mind, Brain, and Behavior (CMBB), University of Marburg and Justus 
Liebig University Giessen, Marburg, Germany. nenadic@staff.uni-marburg.de.
(3)Marburg University Hospital - UKGM, Marburg, Germany. 
nenadic@staff.uni-marburg.de.
(4)Cognitive Neuropsychiatry Lab, Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, 
Philipps Universität Marburg, Marburg, Germany.
(5)Center for Mind, Brain, and Behavior (CMBB), University of Marburg and Justus 
Liebig University Giessen, Marburg, Germany.
(6)Translational Research Center, University Hospital of Psychiatry and 
Psychotherapy, University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland.
(7)Institute of Diagnostic and Interventional Neuroradiology, Inselspital, Bern 
University Hospital, and University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland.
(8)Marburg University Hospital - UKGM, Marburg, Germany.
(9)School of Psychological Sciences, University of Haifa, Mount Carmel, Haifa, 
Israel.
(10)The Haifa Brain and Behavior Hub, University of Haifa, Mount Carmel, Haifa, 
Israel.

Psychiatric disorders show high co-morbidity, including co-morbid expressions of 
subclinical psychopathology across multiple disease spectra. Given the 
limitations of classical case-control designs in elucidating this overlap, new 
approaches are needed to identify biological underpinnings of spectra and their 
interaction. We assessed autistic-like traits (using the Autism Quotient, AQ) 
and schizotypy - as models of subclinical expressions of disease phenotypes and 
examined their association with volumes and regional cerebral blood flow (rCBF) 
of anterior, mid- and posterior hippocampus segments from  structural MRI scans 
in 318 and arterial spin labelling (ASL) in 346 nonclinical subjects, which 
overlapped with the structural imaging sample (N = 298). We demonstrate 
significant interactive effects of positive schizotypy and AQ social skills as 
well as of positive schizotypy and AQ imagination on hippocampal subfield volume 
variation. Moreover, we show that AQ attention switching modulated hippocampal 
head rCBF, while positive schizotypy by AQ attention to detail interactions 
modulated hippocampal tail rCBF. In addition, we show significant correlation of 
hippocampal volume and rCBF in both region-of-interest and voxel-wise analyses, 
which were robust after removal of variance related to schizotypy and autistic 
traits. These findings provide empirical evidence for both the modulation of 
hippocampal subfield structure and function through subclinical traits, and in 
particular how only the interaction of phenotype facets leads to significant 
reductions or variations in these parameters. This makes a case for considering 
the synergistic impact of different (subclinical) disease spectra on 
transdiagnostic biological parameters in psychiatry.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41380-023-02302-w
PMCID: PMC11078729
PMID: 37891246 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.


193. Sci Data. 2022 Mar 29;9(1):114. doi: 10.1038/s41597-022-01226-4.

The Dual Mechanisms of Cognitive Control dataset, a theoretically-guided 
within-subject task fMRI battery.

Etzel JA(1), Brough RE(2), Freund MC(2), Kizhner A(2)(3), Lin Y(2), Singh 
MF(2)(4)(5)(6), Tang R(2), Tay A(2), Wang A(2)(5), Braver TS(2)(7)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, Washington University in St. 
Louis, St. Louis, USA. jetzel@wustl.edu.
(2)Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, Washington University in St. 
Louis, St. Louis, USA.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Miami School of 
Medicine, Miami, USA.
(4)Department of Neuroscience, Washington University in St. Louis, St. Louis, 
USA.
(5)Department of Electrical and Systems Engineering, Washington University in 
St. Louis, St. Louis, USA.
(6)Center for Molecular and Behavioral Neuroscience, Rutgers University, 
Piscataway, USA.
(7)Department of Radiology, Washington University in St. Louis, St. Louis, USA.

Cognitive control is a critical higher mental function, which is subject to 
considerable individual variation, and is impaired in a range of mental health 
disorders. We describe here the initial release of Dual Mechanisms of Cognitive 
Control (DMCC) project data, the DMCC55B dataset, with 55 healthy unrelated 
young adult participants. Each participant performed four well-established 
cognitive control tasks (AX-CPT, Cued Task-Switching, Sternberg Working Memory, 
and Stroop) while undergoing functional MRI scanning. The dataset includes a 
range of state and trait self-report questionnaires, as well as behavioural 
tasks assessing individual differences in cognitive ability. The DMCC project is 
on-going and features additional components (e.g., related participants, 
manipulations of cognitive control mode, resting state fMRI, longitudinal 
testing) that will be publicly released following study completion. This DMCC55B 
subset is released early with the aim of encouraging wider use and greater 
benefit to the scientific community. The DMCC55B dataset is suitable for 
benchmarking and methods exploration, as well as analyses of task performance 
and individual differences.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41597-022-01226-4
PMCID: PMC8964804
PMID: 35351911 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.


194. Neuroimage. 2019 Apr 15;190:94-106. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2018.01.021. Epub 
2018 Jan 11.

Compensatory dopaminergic-cholinergic interactions in conflict processing: 
Evidence from patients with Parkinson's disease.

Kim K(1), Bohnen NI(2), Müller MLTM(3), Lustig C(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, United 
States.
(2)Department of Radiology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, United 
States; Department of Neurology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, 
United States; Morris K. Udall Center of Excellence for Parkinson's Disease 
Research, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, United States; Veterans 
Affairs Ann Arbor Healthcare System, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, United States.
(3)Department of Radiology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, United 
States; Morris K. Udall Center of Excellence for Parkinson's Disease Research, 
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, United States.
(4)Department of Psychology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, United 
States; Neuroscience Program, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, 
United States; Morris K. Udall Center of Excellence for Parkinson's Disease 
Research, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, United States. Electronic 
address: clustig@umich.edu.

Executive functions are complex both in the cognitive operations involved and in 
the neural structures and functions that support those operations. This 
complexity makes executive function highly vulnerable to the detrimental effects 
of aging, brain injury, and disease, but may also open paths to compensation. 
Neural compensation is often used to explain findings of additional or altered 
patterns of brain activations by older adults or patient populations compared to 
young adults or healthy controls, especially when associated with relatively 
preserved performance. Here we test the hypothesis of an alternative form of 
compensation, between different neuromodulator systems. 135 patients with 
Parkinson's Disease (PD) completed vesicular monoamine transporter type2 (VMAT2) 
and acetylcholinesterase PET scanning to assess the integrity of nigrostriatal 
dopaminergic, thalamic cholinergic, and cortical cholinergic pathways, and a 
behavioral test (Stroop + task-switching) that puts high demands on conflict 
processing, an important aspect of executive control. Supporting the 
compensatory hypothesis, regression models controlling for age and other 
covariates revealed an interaction between caudate dopamine and cortical 
cholinergic integrity: Cortical cholinergic integrity was a stronger predictor 
of conflict processing in patients with relatively low caudate dopaminergic 
function. These results suggest that although frontostriatal dopaminergic 
function plays a central role in executive control, cholinergic systems may also 
make an important contribution. The present results suggest potential pathways 
for remediation, and that the appropriate interventions for each patient may 
depend on their particular profile of decline. Furthermore, they help to 
elucidate the brain systems that underlie executive control, which may be 
important for understanding other disorders as well as executive function in 
healthy adults.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2018.01.021
PMCID: PMC6041186
PMID: 29337277 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest The authors declare no 
competing financial interests.


195. Cereb Cortex. 2006 Apr;16(4):475-86. doi: 10.1093/cercor/bhi127. Epub 2005 Jul 
6.

Neural evidence for dissociable components of task-switching.

Crone EA(1), Wendelken C, Donohue SE, Bunge SA.

Author information:
(1)Center for Mind and Brain, University of California, Davis, USA. 
ecrone@fsw.leidenuniv.nl

The ability to retrieve and flexibly switch between task rules is seen as an 
important component of cognitive control. It is often assumed that lateral 
prefrontal cortex (latPFC) is important for switching between rules. However, 
activation associated with rule-switching is less reliably observed in latPFC 
than in medial PFC (specifically, pre-supplementary motor area). In this study, 
we tested the hypothesis that medial PFC is important for reconfiguration of 
task sets, whereas latPFC is important for retrieving, maintaining and 
implementing relevant rules (i.e. rule representation). Twenty young adults 
participated in a functional magnetic resonance imaging study in which they 
determined the correct response to a target stimulus on the basis of an 
instructional cue. For bivalent targets, the appropriate response depended on 
the currently relevant rule. In contrast, univalent targets were always 
associated with the same response. Brain regions of interest were characterized 
according to their responsiveness to bivalent and univalent targets, on both 
rule-switch and rule-repetition trials. The data support the hypothesis that 
rule representation and task-set reconfiguration are separable cognitive 
processes, associated with dissociable neural activation in latPFC and medial 
PFC, respectively. Activation profiles of posterior parietal cortex, basal 
ganglia and rostrolateral PFC are also examined and discussed.

DOI: 10.1093/cercor/bhi127
PMID: 16000652 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Hum Brain Mapp. 2013 Jun;34(6):1254-71. doi: 10.1002/hbm.21508. Epub 2012 Jan 
30.

Disturbed cortico-subcortical interactions during motor task switching in 
traumatic brain injury.

Leunissen I(1), Coxon JP, Geurts M, Caeyenberghs K, Michiels K, Sunaert S, 
Swinnen SP.

Author information:
(1)Motor Control Laboratory, Research Centre of Movement Control and 
Neuroplasticity, Department of Biomedical Kinesiology, Group Biomedical 
Sciences, K.U. Leuven, Belgium.

The ability to suppress and flexibly adapt motor behavior is a fundamental 
mechanism of cognitive control, which is impaired in traumatic brain injury 
(TBI). Here, we used a combination of functional magnetic resonance imaging and 
diffusion weighted imaging tractography to study changes in brain function and 
structure associated with motor switching performance in TBI. Twenty-three young 
adults with moderate-severe TBI and twenty-six healthy controls made spatially 
and temporally coupled bimanual circular movements. A visual cue signaled the 
right hand to switch or continue its circling direction. The time to initiate 
the switch (switch response time) was longer and more variable in the TBI group 
and TBI patients exhibited a higher incidence of complete contralateral (left 
hand) movement disruptions. Both groups activated the basal ganglia and a 
previously described network for task-set implementation, including the 
supplementary motor complex and bilateral inferior frontal cortex (IFC). 
Relative to controls, patients had significantly increased activation in the 
presupplementary motor area (preSMA) and left IFC, and showed underactivation of 
the subthalamic nucleus (STN) region. This altered functional engagement was 
related to the white matter microstructural properties of the tracts connecting 
preSMA, IFC, and STN. Both functional activity in preSMA, IFC, and STN, and the 
integrity of the connections between them were associated with behavioral 
performance across patients and controls. We suggest that damage to these key 
pathways within the motor switching network because of TBI, shifts the patients 
toward the lower end of the existing structure-function-behavior spectrum.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/hbm.21508
PMCID: PMC6870055
PMID: 22287257 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Psychiatr Hung. 2015;30(4):363-71.

[Neurobiological correlates of cognitive flexibility in ADHD - A systematic 
review of the literature].

[Article in Hungarian]

Bálint S(1), Bitter I, Czobor P.

Author information:
(1)Semmelweis Egyetem Pszichiatriai es Pszichoterapias Klinika, Budapest, 
Hungary, E-mail: balint.sara@med.semmelweis-univ.hu.

INTRODUCTION: Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) is one of the most 
commonly diagnosed childhood psychiatric disorders, which persists to adulthood 
in 30-50% of the cases. Previous studies have shown that cognitive flexibility, 
which means to switch between two different rules, that can be tested with task 
switching paradigms, is affected. Although poor performance in cognitive 
flexibility tests has been demostrated, the neurobiological background is only 
partly known.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of our review was to examine the neurobiological background 
of impairment of cognitive flexibility in ADHD, with a specific focus on 
functional MRI (fMRI) and electrophysiological (electroencephalography, EEG) 
studies.
METHODS: We searched MEDLINE, PubMed, and PsychInfo using the following 
keywords: 'ADHD', 'cognitive flexibility', 'set shifting', 'task switching', 
'EEG', 'fMRI'.
RESULTS: Compared to healthy controls, ADHD patients showed reduced activation 
in regions of the prefrontal and parietal lobe and in the basal ganglia. However 
in two studies, increased activation was also observed in specific regions of 
temporal lobe and in anterior cingulate cortex. Magnetoencephalographic results 
indicated that instead of an increased activity in medio-temporal lobe, ADHD 
patients showed an enhanced activation in the superior temporal gyrus and in the 
left inferior parietal lobe.
CONCLUSIONS: Based on our review, patients with ADHD, as compared to healthy 
controls, showed reduced activation in brain regions associated with cognitive 
flexibility. Based on the differences in the spatial and temporal patterns of 
activation in the temporal lobe we conclude that ADHD patient engage different 
brain regions to resolve the conflicts caused by task switching. However, 
further studies are required to corroborate this conclusion.

PMID: 26771696 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


198. J Neurosci. 2001 Jul 15;21(14):5262-71. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.21-14-05262.2001.

Attention systems and the organization of the human parietal cortex.

Rushworth MF(1), Paus T, Sipila PK.

Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental Psychology, Oxford University, Oxford, OX1 3UD, 
United Kingdom. matthew.rushworth@psy.ox.ac.uk

Event-related functional magnetic resonance imaging was used to compare activity 
in the human parietal cortex in two attention-switching paradigms. On each trial 
of the visual switching (VS) paradigm, subjects attended to one of two visual 
stimuli on the basis of either their color or shape. Trials were presented in 
blocks interleaved with cues instructing subjects to either continue attending 
to the currently relevant dimension or to switch to the other stimulus 
dimension. In the response switching (RS) paradigm, subjects made one of two 
manual responses to the single stimulus presented on each trial. The rules for 
stimulus-response mapping were reversed on different trials. Trials were 
presented in blocks interleaved with cues that instructed subjects to either 
switch stimulus-response mapping rules or to continue with the current rule. 
Brain activity at "switch" and "stay" events was compared. The results revealed 
distinct parietal areas concerned with visual attentional set shifts (VS) and 
visuomotor intentional set shifts (RS). In VS, activity was recorded in the 
lateral part of the intraparietal region. In RS, activity was recorded in the 
posterior medial intraparietal region and adjacent posterior superior and 
dorsomedial parietal cortex. The results also suggest that the basic functional 
organization of the intraparietal sulcus and surrounding regions is similar in 
both macaque and human species.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.21-14-05262.2001
PMCID: PMC6762864
PMID: 11438601 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Biol Psychol. 2013 Feb;92(2):295-300. doi: 10.1016/j.biopsycho.2012.10.014. Epub 
2012 Nov 24.

A carry-over task rule in task switching: an ERP investigation using a Go/Nogo 
paradigm.

Umebayashi K(1), Okita T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Home and Life Sciences, Gifu Women's University, 80, Taromaru, 
Gifu City 501-2592, Japan. kaoru@gijodai.ac.jp

Investigations of executive control using a task-switching paradigm have 
consistently found longer reaction times for task-switch trials than 
task-repetition trials. This switch cost may result from interference by a 
stimulus-response (SR) rule carried over from the preceding alternative task. We 
examined event-related brain potential (ERP) evidence for such carry-over 
effects using a combined paradigm of task switching with Go/Nogo; Nogo trials, 
which require no response execution, should expose carry-over effects from 
preceding trials. On Go trials, twelve participants performed a button-pressing 
task in compatible (hand and signal direction consistent) and incompatible 
conditions, which switched predictably every three trials. Reaction times were 
longer on switch than on repetition trials. On compatible switch trials, a 
stimulus-locked lateralized readiness potential (sLRP) for Nogo stimuli revealed 
a positive dip, suggesting incorrect response activation in the early automatic 
process that was induced by a SR rule carried over from the preceding task.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.biopsycho.2012.10.014
PMID: 23182873 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Neuroimage. 2019 Dec;203:116193. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2019.116193. Epub 
2019 Sep 13.

Defining the neural correlates of spontaneous theory of mind (ToM): An fMRI 
multi-study investigation.

Boccadoro S(1), Cracco E(2), Hudson AR(1), Bardi L(3), Nijhof AD(4), Wiersema 
JR(1), Brass M(2), Mueller SC(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental Clinical and Health Psychology, Ghent University, 
Ghent, Belgium.
(2)Department of Experimental Psychology, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium.
(3)Department of Experimental Psychology, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium; 
Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience Marc Jeannerod, CNRS / UMR 5229, 67 Bd 
Pinel, 69500, Bron, France.
(4)Department of Experimental Clinical and Health Psychology, Ghent University, 
Ghent, Belgium; Social, Genetic and Developmental Psychiatry Centre, Institute 
of Psychiatry, Psychology and Neuroscience, King's College London, UK.
(5)Department of Experimental Clinical and Health Psychology, Ghent University, 
Ghent, Belgium. Electronic address: muellersvenc@gmail.com.

There is a major debate in the theory of mind (ToM) field, concerning whether 
spontaneous and explicit ToM are based on the same or two distinct cognitive 
systems. While extensive research on the neural correlates of explicit ToM has 
demonstrated involvement of the temporo-parietal junction (TPJ) and the medial 
prefrontal cortex (mPFC), few studies investigated spontaneous ToM, leaving some 
open questions. Here, we implemented a multi-study approach by pooling data from 
three fMRI studies to obtain a larger sample to increase power and sensitivity 
to better define the neurocognitive mechanisms underlying spontaneous ToM. 
Participants watched videos in which an agent acquires a true or false belief 
about the location of a ball. Thus, the belief of the agent and that of the 
participant could either match or differ. Importantly, participants were never 
asked to consider the belief of the agent and were only instructed to press a 
button when they detected the presence of the ball after an occluder fell at the 
end of each video. By analysing the blood-oxygen level dependent signal during 
the belief formation phase for false versus true beliefs, we found a cluster of 
activation in the right, and to a lesser extent, left posterior parietal cortex 
spanning the TPJ, but no mPFC activation. Region of interest (ROI) analysis on 
bilateral TPJ and mPFC confirmed these results and added evidence to the 
asymmetry in laterality of the TPJ in spontaneous ToM. Interestingly, the whole 
brain analysis, supported by an overlap with brain maps, revealed maximum 
activation in areas involved in visuospatial working memory and attention 
switching functions, such as the supramarginal gyrus, the middle temporal gyrus, 
and the inferior frontal gyrus. By contrast, evidence for the presence of 
brain-behaviour correlations was mixed and there was no evidence for functional 
connectivity between the TPJ and mPFC. Taken together, these findings help 
clarifying the brain system supporting spontaneous ToM.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2019.116193
PMID: 31525499 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


201. Cortex. 2019 Nov;120:101-115. doi: 10.1016/j.cortex.2019.03.017. Epub 2019 Apr 
4.

Numbers in action during cognitive flexibility - A neurophysiological approach 
on numerical operations underlying task switching.

Petruo VA(1), Mückschel M(2), Beste C(2).

Author information:
(1)Cognitive Neurophysiology, Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 
Faculty of Medicine, TU Dresden, Germany. Electronic address: 
vanessa.petruo@uniklinikum-dresden.de.
(2)Cognitive Neurophysiology, Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 
Faculty of Medicine, TU Dresden, Germany.

Cognitive flexibility is a major competence to cope with daily life requirements 
and is usually investigated using task switching paradigms. Often, numerical 
stimuli are used to examine switching between task rules. Based upon functional 
neuroanatomical considerations we hypothesize that the ability to efficiently 
perform task switching varies depending on the cognitive operations performed 
with these numerical stimuli during task switching (magnitude vs parity 
judgments). We use a system-neurophysiological approach combining EEG and 
event-related potential (ERP) recordings with temporal data decomposition and 
source localization methods. We show that task switching processes are more 
demanding during parity judgments, compared to magnitude judgments. This, 
however, was only the case when task switching processes were triggered by 
external sensory stimuli, but not when memory-based processes had to be used 
during task switching. After accounting for intra-individual variability in the 
EEG data, the neurophysiological data showed that these effects were due to very 
specific subprocesses reflecting processes to update task sets and 
stimulus-response mappings during task switching. Source reconstructions show 
that left inferior and superior parietal areas (BA40 and BA7) were associated 
with these processes. The data show how different numerical operations 
differentially affect cognitive flexibility processes. Especially parity 
judgments exacerbate processes to update and reconfigure task sets during task 
switching in parietal areas. These findings are a valuable contribution to 
further reflections on the theories developed to date in task switching.

Copyright © 2019. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cortex.2019.03.017
PMID: 31299496 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Neuropsychologia. 2007 Oct 1;45(13):2883-901. doi: 
10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2007.06.015. Epub 2007 Jun 29.

Left ventrolateral prefrontal cortex and the cognitive control of memory.

Badre D(1), Wagner AD.

Author information:
(1)Helen Wills Neuroscience Institute, 132 Barker Hall, MC3190, UC Berkeley, CA 
94720-3190, USA. dbadre@berkeley.edu

Cognitive control mechanisms permit memory to be accessed strategically, and so 
aid in bringing knowledge to mind that is relevant to current goals and actions. 
In this review, we consider the contribution of left ventrolateral prefrontal 
cortex (VLPFC) to the cognitive control of memory. Reviewed evidence supports a 
two-process model of mnemonic control, supported by a double dissociation among 
rostral regions of left VLPFC. Specifically, anterior VLPFC (approximately BA 
47; inferior frontal gyrus pars orbitalis) supports controlled access to stored 
conceptual representations, whereas mid-VLPFC (approximately BA 45; inferior 
frontal gyrus pars triangularis) supports a domain-general selection process 
that operates post-retrieval to resolve competition among active 
representations. We discuss the contribution of these control mechanisms across 
a range of mnemonic domains, including semantic retrieval, recollection of 
contextual details about past events, resolution of proactive interference in 
working memory, and task switching. Finally, we consider open directions for 
future research into left VLPFC function and the cognitive control of memory.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2007.06.015
PMID: 17675110 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Neuroimage Clin. 2018 Jun 18;19:1018-1024. doi: 10.1016/j.nicl.2018.06.021. 
eCollection 2018.

Neurophysiological correlates of the attention training technique: A component 
study.

Rosenbaum D(1), Maier MJ(2), Hudak J(2), Metzger FG(3), Wells A(4), Fallgatter 
AJ(5), Ehlis AC(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, University Hospital of Tuebingen, 
Tuebingen, Germany. Electronic address: david.rosenbaum@med.uni-tuebingen.de.
(2)Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, University Hospital of Tuebingen, 
Tuebingen, Germany.
(3)Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, University Hospital of Tuebingen, 
Tuebingen, Germany; Geriatric Center, University Hospital of Tuebingen, 
Tuebingen, Germany.
(4)Division of Psychology and Mental Health, School of Health Sciences, Faculty 
of Biology, Medicine and Health, The University of Manchester, Manchester 
Academic Health Science Centre, Manchester, United Kingdom.
(5)Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, University Hospital of Tuebingen, 
Tuebingen, Germany; Center of Integrative Neuroscience (CIN), Cluster of 
Excellence, University of Tuebingen, Germany; LEAD Graduate School & Research 
Network, University of Tuebingen, Tuebingen, Germany.
(6)Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, University Hospital of Tuebingen, 
Tuebingen, Germany; LEAD Graduate School & Research Network, University of 
Tuebingen, Tuebingen, Germany.

In the current study, we investigate the neuronal correlates of the Attention 
Training Technique (ATT), a psychotherapeutic intervention used in metacognitive 
therapy to enhance flexible cognitive control and ameliorate rumination. We 
adapted the ATT in a neuroscientific attention paradigm in order to investigate 
the effects of its components: selective attention, attention switching and 
divided attention in comparison to a control task. Functional near-infrared 
spectroscopy was used to measure changes in blood oxygenation of fronto-lateral 
and parietal cortical areas. Furthermore, subjects rated their task performance, 
effort and attention drifts in each task condition. We observed increased blood 
oxygenation in the right inferior frontal gyrus, right dorsolateral prefrontal 
cortex and superior parietal lobule during the ATT conditions in comparison to 
the control condition. Additionally, subjective effort was associated with blood 
oxygenation in the right inferior prefrontal cortex. Our results are consistent 
with the theoretical underpinnings of the ATT suggesting that the ATT's 
mechanism of change lies in the training of areas of the cognitive control 
network and dorsal attention network. Aberrant functioning of both networks has 
been shown to be related to depression and rumination.

DOI: 10.1016/j.nicl.2018.06.021
PMCID: PMC6039840
PMID: 30003039 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


204. Acta Neurobiol Exp (Wars). 2014;74(4):465-78. doi: 10.55782/ane-2014-2009.

The neural correlates of specific executive dysfunctions in Parkinson's disease.

Gawrys L(1), Falkiewicz M, Pilacinski A, Riegel M, Piatkowska-Janko E, 
Bogorodzki P, Wolak T, Andrysiak R, Krolicki L, Kulinski R, Koziorowski D, Janik 
P, Rymarczyk K, Grabowska A, Kaczmarek L, Szatkowska I.

Author information:
(1)Second Department of Psychiatry, Institute of Psychiatry and Neurology, 
Warsaw, Poland; i.szatkowska@nencki.gov.pl.

Several functional neuroimaging studies in patients with Parkinson's disease 
(PD) have suggested that changes in the fronto-parietal-striatal networks are 
associated with deficits in executive functioning. However, executive functions 
(EF) are multifaceted and include three dissociable components: working memory, 
response inhibition, and task-switching. This study investigated which component 
of executive functioning is most strongly associated with 
fronto-parietal-striatal efficiency in PD. PD patients (with and without 
executive dysfunction), and age-matched healthy subjects, completed a battery of 
cognitive tests previously shown to discriminate among the three EF components. 
Principal component analysis conducted on the selected cognitive test variables 
yielded three expected EF components. The component scores were used in 
regression analysis to assess the relationship between the EF efficiency and 
blood oxygenation level-dependent (BOLD) signal related to performing the 
n-back, an experimental task that draws upon multiple components of executive 
functioning: working memory, response inhibition, and task-switching. We found 
distinct neural correlates of specific executive dysfunctions in patients with 
PD. However, all of them seem to be associated with fronto-parietal-striatal 
efficiency.

DOI: 10.55782/ane-2014-2009
PMID: 25576977 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Neuropsychologia. 2000;38(6):848-63. doi: 10.1016/s0028-3932(99)00134-7.

The cognitive and neuroanatomical correlates of multitasking.

Burgess PW(1), Veitch E, de Lacy Costello A, Shallice T.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience, UCL, UK. p.burgess@psychol.ucl.ac.uk

Patients who show the "strategy application disorder" can show deficits 
restricted to situations requiring multitasking, but the precise neuroanatomical 
and cognitive correlates of this problem have been rarely investigated. In this 
study, 60 people with circumscribed cerebral lesions and 60 age- and IQ-matched 
controls were given a multitasking procedure which allowed consideration of the 
relative contributions of task learning and remembering, planning, 
plan-following and remembering one's actions to multitasking performance. 
Lesions to the left posterior cingulate and forceps major regions gave deficits 
on all measures except planning. Remembering task contingencies after a delay 
was also affected by lesions in the region of the left anterior cingulate, and 
rule-breaking and failures of task switching were additionally found in people 
with lesions affecting the medial and more polar aspects of Brodmann's areas 8, 
9 and especially 10. Planning deficits were associated with lesions to the right 
dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (RDLPFC). A theory of the relationships between 
the cognitive constructs underpinning multitasking was tested using structural 
equation modelling. The results suggest that there are three primary constructs 
that support multitasking: retrospective memory, prospective memory, and 
planning, with the second two drawing upon the products of the first. It is 
tentatively suggested that the left anterior and posterior cingulates together 
play some part in the retrospective memory demands, while the prospective memory 
and planning components make demands on processes supported by the left areas 8, 
9 and 10 and the RDLPFC respectively.

DOI: 10.1016/s0028-3932(99)00134-7
PMID: 10689059 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Biol Psychol. 2025 Jan;194:108979. doi: 10.1016/j.biopsycho.2024.108979. Epub 
2024 Dec 30.

The intrinsic functional connectivity of psychopathy and its relation to 
self-control.

Kng JH(1), Luo L(2), Choy O(2), Yu J(2).

Author information:
(1)Psychology, School of Social Sciences, Nanyang Technological University, 
Singapore. Electronic address: kngj0001@e.ntu.edu.sg.
(2)Psychology, School of Social Sciences, Nanyang Technological University, 
Singapore.

Previous research has found functional connectivity in various networks to be 
altered in psychopathy and has theorised a link between these networks and the 
self-control-related deficits observed in psychopathy. However, this theory has 
yet to be tested adequately and empirically. The present study investigated the 
association between psychopathy, self-control, and intrinsic functional 
connectivity in 179 healthy adults from the MPI Leipzig Mind Brain Body dataset. 
Participants completed an affective switching task and questionnaires relating 
to psychopathy and self-control and underwent resting-state fMRI scans. 
Functional connectivity matrices were extracted for each subject, and 
network-based statistics was used to identify intrinsic resting-state functional 
networks associated with psychopathy scores. Significant networks that are 
positively and negatively associated with psychopathy emerged in the analyses. 
The functional connections that correlated positively with psychopathy was 
mostly characterised by strong connections between the default mode network and 
salience network, while the functional connections negatively correlated with 
psychopathy was largely characterised by strong within-dorsal attention network 
connectivity. Both the psychopathy-associated positive and negative networks 
were significantly correlated with measures of self-control and impulsivity. 
Furthermore, the negative network mediated the relationship between psychopathy 
and affective task-switching. Findings suggest that alterations in intrinsic 
functional connectivity are significantly implicated in psychopathy; these 
alterations possibly account for some self-control related deficits observed in 
psychopathy.

Copyright © 2025 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.biopsycho.2024.108979
PMID: 39743174 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.


207. Dev Cogn Neurosci. 2026 Apr;78:101669. doi: 10.1016/j.dcn.2026.101669. Epub 2026 
Jan 4.

The development of dynamic networks supporting attentional flexibility.

Coleman SC(1), Rhodes N(2), Wong SM(3), Mithani K(4), Warsi NM(5), Suresh H(4), 
Anagnostou E(6), Crosbie J(7), Schachar R(2), Lerch JP(8), Taylor MJ(9), Ibrahim 
GM(10).

Author information:
(1)Neurosciences and Mental Health, Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, Canada. 
Electronic address: sebastian.coleman@sickkids.ca.
(2)Neurosciences and Mental Health, Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, Canada.
(3)Neurosciences and Mental Health, Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, Canada; 
Institute of Biomedical Engineering, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada.
(4)Neurosciences and Mental Health, Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, Canada; 
Institute of Biomedical Engineering, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada; 
Division of Neurosurgery, Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, Canada.
(5)Institute of Biomedical Engineering, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada; 
Division of Neurosurgery, Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, Canada.
(6)Autism Research Centre, Holland Bloorview Kids Rehabilitation Hospital, 
Toronto, Canada; Institute of Medical Science, University of Toronto, Toronto, 
Canada; Department of Paediatrics, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada.
(7)Neurosciences and Mental Health, Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, Canada; 
Department of Psychiatry, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada; Genetics and 
Genome Biology, Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, Canada.
(8)Neurosciences and Mental Health, Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, Canada; 
Oxford Centre for Integrative Neuroimaging, University of Oxford, Oxford, United 
Kingdom; Department of Medical Biophysics, University of Toronto, Toronto, 
Canada.
(9)Neurosciences and Mental Health, Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, Canada; 
Department of Diagnostic Imaging, Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, Canada.
(10)Neurosciences and Mental Health, Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, 
Canada; Institute of Biomedical Engineering, University of Toronto, Toronto, 
Canada; Division of Neurosurgery, Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, Canada; 
Department of Surgery, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada. Electronic 
address: george.ibrahim@sickkids.ca.

Attentional flexibility is a foundational component of human cognition and 
develops substantially throughout childhood. Although the neural activity 
supporting attentional flexibility has been well-characterised in adults, its 
developmental trajectory during childhood and adolescence remains poorly 
understood. Here, we used magnetoencephalography (MEG) to study brain network 
dynamics underlying attentional set-shifting. MEG data were collected from 63 
participants aged 4 - 19 years, including 30 with a diagnosis of 
attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). We applied dynamic network 
modes (DyNeMo), a multivariate generative modelling approach that infers a 
dynamic mixture of spectrally resolved "modes" that generate the observed data. 
We related the resulting mode dynamics to task condition (non-shift, implicit 
shift, explicit shift), reaction time (RT), accuracy, age and ADHD diagnosis. 
Greater attention shifting demands were associated with increased modulation of 
frontal theta and posterior alpha modes. Transient lapses in attention, indexed 
by slower RTs or incorrect responses, were likewise characterised by heightened 
modulation of these modes across all task conditions. Developmentally, older 
children showed higher overall activity in the frontal theta mode, and stronger 
post-stimulus modulation of both frontal theta and posterior alpha modes. No 
significant effects of ADHD diagnosis were observed on either behavioural 
performance or mode dynamics. Together, these findings provide mechanistic 
insight into large-scale network dynamics that support the maturation of 
attentional flexibility, and point to network signatures associated with 
momentary lapses in attention.

Copyright © 2026 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.dcn.2026.101669
PMCID: PMC12819026
PMID: 41518864 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.


208. Neuroimage. 2003 Oct;20(2):1298-308. doi: 10.1016/S1053-8119(03)00400-2.

Co-ordination within and between verbal and visuospatial working memory: network 
modulation and anterior frontal recruitment.

Kübler A(1), Murphy K, Kaufman J, Stein EA, Garavan H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology and Institute of Neuroscience, Trinity College 
Dublin, 2, Dublin, Ireland.

Attention switching between items being stored and manipulated in working memory 
(WM) is proposed to be an elementary executive function. Experiment 1 reveals a 
similar attentional limitation within and between verbal and visuospatial WM and 
identifies a supramodal switching process required for switching between WM 
items. By using functional magnetic resonance imaging, Experiment 2 investigated 
brain activation correlates of parametrically varied attention switching within 
and between these two WM modalities. Attention switching activation was broadly 
distributed, was quite similar across the three conditions, and, in almost all 
areas, increased with increasing switching demand, indicating that attention 
switching recruits and modulates the entire WM network. Dorsolateral prefrontal 
cortex was implicated in both within- and between-modality attention switching, 
but no significant activation was found in ventrolateral areas, supporting 
dorsal-ventral process models of prefrontal organization. A functional 
dissociation between anterior frontal and dorsolateral prefrontal cortex was 
found with the former being more activated when switching attention between 
modalities was required. The data challenge the notion of an anatomically 
separate attention switching executive function, but suggest that anterior 
frontal areas are recruited for the additional demand of coordinating the verbal 
and visuospatial WM slave systems.

DOI: 10.1016/S1053-8119(03)00400-2
PMID: 14568498 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Schizophr Res. 2020 Jun;220:201-209. doi: 10.1016/j.schres.2020.03.020. Epub 
2020 Mar 20.

Context-dependent dynamic functional connectivity alteration of lateral 
occipital cortex in schizophrenia.

Li K(1), Sweeney JA(2), Hu XP(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Bioengineering, University of California, Riverside, Riverside, 
CA, USA.
(2)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Neuroscience, University of 
Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH, USA.
(3)Department of Bioengineering, University of California, Riverside, Riverside, 
CA, USA. Electronic address: xhu@engr.ucr.edu.

Schizophrenia has long been associated with dysfunction in visual perception. 
One important region underlying this is lateral occipital cortex (LOC), a 
mid-level visual region critical for object recognition. Although LOC of 
patients has exhibited structural and functional abnormalities in MR brain 
imaging studies, how it interacts with other networks over time under rest and 
with task demands remains to be clarified. The present study investigated the 
spatial-temporal interaction of LOC with other brain networks by examining 
functional connectivity communities of the brain over time. We found increased 
temporal instability of LOC connectivity over time under both resting and 
task-switching conditions in patients. In the resting state, LOC of patients had 
increased interaction with the frontoparietal task-control network (FPTC) and 
thalamus compared with controls, while during task switching, LOC showed 
increased interaction with the default mode network (DMN). Temporal instability 
of LOC connectivity was positively correlated with patients' switching cost 
during task performance and with hallucination severity. These results indicate 
that reduced stability of LOC connectivity may be an important factor underlying 
neurocognitive dysfunctions and symptom severity in schizophrenia.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.schres.2020.03.020
PMID: 32201032 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


210. Dev Sci. 2016 May;19(3):469-87. doi: 10.1111/desc.12316. Epub 2015 Jul 17.

Neuro-oscillatory mechanisms of intersensory selective attention and task 
switching in school-aged children, adolescents and young adults.

Murphy JW(1)(2), Foxe JJ(1)(2)(3), Molholm S(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)The Sheryl and Daniel R. Tishman Cognitive Neurophysiology Laboratory, 
Children's Evaluation and Rehabilitation Center (CERC), Department of 
Pediatrics, Albert Einstein College of Medicine & Montefiore Medical Center, New 
York, USA.
(2)Program in Cognitive Neuroscience, The Graduate Center of the City University 
of New York, USA.
(3)The Dominick P. Purpura Department of Neuroscience, Rose F. Kennedy 
Intellectual and Developmental Disabilities Research Center, Albert Einstein 
College of Medicine, New York, USA.

The ability to attend to one among multiple sources of information is central to 
everyday functioning. Just as central is the ability to switch attention among 
competing inputs as the task at hand changes. Such processes develop 
surprisingly slowly, such that even into adolescence, we remain slower and more 
error prone at switching among tasks compared to young adults. The amplitude of 
oscillations in the alpha band (~8-14 Hz) tracks the top-down deployment of 
attention, and there is growing evidence that alpha can act as a suppressive 
mechanism to bias attention away from distracting sensory input. Moreover, the 
amplitude of alpha has also been shown to be sensitive to the demands of 
switching tasks. To understand the neural basis of protracted development of 
these executive functions, we recorded high-density electrophysiology from 
school-aged children (8-12 years), adolescents (13-17), and young adults (18-34) 
as they performed a cued inter-sensory selective attention task. The youngest 
participants showed increased susceptibility to distracting inputs that was 
especially evident when switching tasks. Concordantly, they showed weaker and 
delayed onset of alpha modulation compared to the older groups. Thus the 
flexible and efficient deployment of alpha to bias competition among attentional 
sets remains underdeveloped in school-aged children.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/desc.12316
PMCID: PMC5361894
PMID: 26190204 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Cereb Cortex. 2023 Feb 20;33(5):1985-2000. doi: 10.1093/cercor/bhac187.

Brain connectivity modulation by Bayesian surprise in relation to control demand 
drives cognitive flexibility via control engagement.

Qiao L(1), Zhang L(1), Chen A(2).

Author information:
(1)School of Psychology, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen, China.
(2)Department Psychology, Shanghai Univ Sport, Shanghai 200438, Peoples R China.

Human control is characterized by its flexibility and adaptability in response 
to the conditional probability in the environment. Previous studies have 
revealed that efficient conflict control could be attained by predicting and 
adapting to the changing control demand. However, it is unclear whether 
cognitive flexibility could also be gained by predicting and adapting to the 
changing control demand. The present study aimed to explore this issue by 
combining the model-based analyses of behavioral and neuroimaging data with a 
probabilistic cued task switching paradigm. We demonstrated that the Bayesian 
surprise (i.e. unsigned precision-weighted prediction error [PE]) negatively 
modulated the connections among stimulus processing brain regions and control 
regions/networks. The effect of Bayesian surprise modulation on these 
connections guided control engagement as reflected by the control PE effect on 
behavior, which in turn facilitated cognitive flexibility. These results bridge 
a gap in the literature by illustrating the neural and behavioral effect of 
control demand prediction (or PE) on cognitive flexibility and offer novel 
insights into the source of switch cost and the mechanism of cognitive 
flexibility.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. 
For permissions, please e-mail: journals.permission@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/cercor/bhac187
PMID: 35553644 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


212. PLoS One. 2014 Jun 17;9(6):e99868. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0099868. 
eCollection 2014.

Behavioral and neural correlates of executive functioning in musicians and 
non-musicians.

Zuk J(1), Benjamin C(2), Kenyon A(3), Gaab N(4).

Author information:
(1)Laboratories of Cognitive Neuroscience, Division of Developmental Medicine, 
Department of Developmental Medicine, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, 
Massachusetts, United States of America; Harvard Medical School, Boston, 
Massachusetts, United States of America.
(2)Laboratories of Cognitive Neuroscience, Division of Developmental Medicine, 
Department of Developmental Medicine, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, 
Massachusetts, United States of America; Harvard Medical School, Boston, 
Massachusetts, United States of America; University of California Los Angeles, 
Semel Institute, Los Angeles, California, United States of America.
(3)Laboratories of Cognitive Neuroscience, Division of Developmental Medicine, 
Department of Developmental Medicine, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, 
Massachusetts, United States of America.
(4)Laboratories of Cognitive Neuroscience, Division of Developmental Medicine, 
Department of Developmental Medicine, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, 
Massachusetts, United States of America; Harvard Medical School, Boston, 
Massachusetts, United States of America; Harvard Graduate School of Education, 
Cambridge, Massachusetts, United States of America.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2015 Sep 02;10(9):e0137930. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0137930.
    PLoS One. 2018 Jan 11;13(1):e0191394. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0191394.

Executive functions (EF) are cognitive capacities that allow for planned, 
controlled behavior and strongly correlate with academic abilities. Several 
extracurricular activities have been shown to improve EF, however, the 
relationship between musical training and EF remains unclear due to 
methodological limitations in previous studies. To explore this further, two 
experiments were performed; one with 30 adults with and without musical training 
and one with 27 musically trained and untrained children (matched for general 
cognitive abilities and socioeconomic variables) with a standardized EF battery. 
Furthermore, the neural correlates of EF skills in musically trained and 
untrained children were investigated using fMRI. Adult musicians compared to 
non-musicians showed enhanced performance on measures of cognitive flexibility, 
working memory, and verbal fluency. Musically trained children showed enhanced 
performance on measures of verbal fluency and processing speed, and 
significantly greater activation in pre-SMA/SMA and right VLPFC during rule 
representation and task-switching compared to musically untrained children. 
Overall, musicians show enhanced performance on several constructs of EF, and 
musically trained children further show heightened brain activation in 
traditional EF regions during task-switching. These results support the working 
hypothesis that musical training may promote the development and maintenance of 
certain EF skills, which could mediate the previously reported links between 
musical training and enhanced cognitive skills and academic achievement.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0099868
PMCID: PMC4061064
PMID: 24937544 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.


213. Brain Behav. 2018 Sep;8(9):e01063. doi: 10.1002/brb3.1063. Epub 2018 Jul 26.

Neural activity patterns between different executive tasks are more similar in 
adulthood than in adolescence.

Moisala M(1)(2), Salmela V(1)(2), Carlson S(3)(4), Salmela-Aro K(5)(6), Lonka 
K(5)(7), Hakkarainen K(5), Alho K(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology and Logopedics, Faculty of Medicine, University of 
Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.
(2)AMI Centre, Aalto NeuroImaging, Aalto University School of Science, Espoo, 
Finland.
(3)Department of Neuroscience and Biomedical Engineering, Aalto University 
School of Science, Espoo, Finland.
(4)Department of Physiology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Helsinki, 
Helsinki, Finland.
(5)Faculty of Educational Sciences, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.
(6)Institute of Education, University College London, London, UK.
(7)Optentia Research Focus Area, North-West University, Vanderbijlpark, South 
Africa.

BACKGROUND: Adolescence is a time of ongoing neural maturation and cognitive 
development, especially regarding executive functions. In the current study, 
age-related differences in the neural correlates of different executive 
functions were tracked by comparing three age groups consisting of adolescents 
and young adults.
METHODS: Brain activity was measured with functional magnetic resonance imaging 
(fMRI) from 167 human participants (13- to 14-year-old middle adolescents, 16- 
to 17-year-old late adolescents and 20- to 24-year-old young adults; 80 female, 
87 male) while they performed attention and working memory tasks. The tasks were 
designed to tap into four putative sub-processes of executive function: division 
of attention, inhibition of distractors, working memory, and attention 
switching.
RESULTS: Behaviorally, our results demonstrated superior task performance in 
older participants across all task types. When brain activity was examined, 
young adult participants demonstrated a greater degree of overlap between brain 
regions recruited by the different executive tasks than adolescent participants. 
Similarly, functional connectivity between frontoparietal cortical regions was 
less task specific in the young adult participants than in adolescent 
participants.
CONCLUSIONS: Together, these results demonstrate that the similarity between 
different executive processes in terms of both neural recruitment and functional 
connectivity increases with age from middle adolescence to early adulthood, 
possibly contributing to age-related behavioral improvements in executive 
functioning. These developmental changes in brain recruitment may reflect a more 
homogenous morphological organization between process-specific neural networks, 
increased reliance on a more domain-general network involved in executive 
processing, or developmental changes in cognitive strategy.

© 2018 The Authors. Brain and Behavior published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/brb3.1063
PMCID: PMC6160639
PMID: 30051640 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Exp Brain Res. 2006 Apr;170(3):295-301. doi: 10.1007/s00221-005-0211-y. Epub 
2005 Nov 30.

Relevance of EEG alpha and theta oscillations during task switching.

Sauseng P(1), Klimesch W, Freunberger R, Pecherstorfer T, Hanslmayr S, 
Doppelmayr M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Salzburg, Hellbrunnerstr. 34, 5020 
Salzburg, Austria, Europe. paul.sauseng@sbg.ac.at

In a task switching design, we investigated the question whether long-range 
theta coupling primarily reflects top-down control processes. Switch and stay 
trials did not differ with respect to memory load or global working memory (WM) 
demands. The results revealed significantly stronger theta coupling (in a range 
of 4-7 Hz) between prefrontal and posterior regions during switch as compared to 
stay trials. Power differences, reflecting more local effects, were largest in 
the upper alpha band (10-13 Hz) and over posterior brain areas, possibly 
reflecting long-term memory activation. The conclusion of the present study is 
that long-range coherent oscillatory activity in the theta band reflects 
top-down activation rather than global WM functions.

DOI: 10.1007/s00221-005-0211-y
PMID: 16317574 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Psychiatry Res Neuroimaging. 2016 Mar 30;249:52-6. doi: 
10.1016/j.pscychresns.2016.02.007. Epub 2016 Feb 23.

Brain effects of computer-assisted cognitive remediation therapy in anorexia 
nervosa: A pilot fMRI study.

Brockmeyer T(1), Walther S(2), Ingenerf K(2), Wild B(2), Hartmann M(2), Weisbrod 
M(3), Weber MA(4), Eckhardt-Henn A(5), Herzog W(2), Friederich HC(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of General Internal Medicine and Psychosomatics, University 
Hospital Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany. Electronic address: 
timo.brockmeyer@med.uni-heidelberg.de.
(2)Department of General Internal Medicine and Psychosomatics, University 
Hospital Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany.
(3)Section of Experimental Psychopathology and Neurophysiology, University 
Hospital Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany; Department of Psychiatry, SRH Hospital 
Karlsbad-Langensteinbach, Karlsbad, Germany.
(4)Department of Diagnostic and Interventional Radiology, University Hospital 
Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany.
(5)Department of Psychosomatic Medicine, Hospital Stuttgart, Stuttgart, Germany.
(6)Department of General Internal Medicine and Psychosomatics, University 
Hospital Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany; Department of Psychosomatic Medicine 
and Psychotherapy, LVR-clinics, University Duisburg-Essen, Essen, Germany.

Poor cognitive-behavioral flexibility is considered a trait marker in anorexia 
nervosa (AN) that can be improved by cognitive remediation therapy (CRT). The 
present pilot study aimed at identifying changes in brain function potentially 
associated with CRT in AN. Data was obtained from a randomized, controlled 
trial. Twenty-four patients were assessed before and after 30 sessions of either 
CRT or a non-specific neurocognitive therapy. Voxel-wise analysis of whole brain 
functional magnetic resonance imaging was applied. Brain activation was measured 
during response inhibition and task switching. Although results did not reach 
significance, we found tentative support for CRT-related increases in brain 
activation in the dorsal putamen during task switching and in the dorsolateral 
prefrontal, sensorimotor and temporal cortex during response inhibition. These 
pilot findings provide viable pathways for future research on brain changes 
underlying CRT in AN.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pscychresns.2016.02.007
PMID: 27000307 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


216. Brain Res. 2006 Mar 17;1078(1):131-42. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2006.01.032. Epub 
2006 Mar 9.

Attention shift in human verbal working memory: priming contribution and dynamic 
brain activation.

Li Z(1), Bao M, Chen X, Zhang D, Han S, He S, Hu X.

Author information:
(1)Hefei National Laboratory for Physical Science at Microscale, and School of 
Life Science, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, Anhui 
230026, PR China.

When multiple items in working memory need to be accessed and manipulated, the 
internal attention should switch between them and, this switching process is 
time consuming. However, it is not clear how much of this switching cost is due 
to the existence or absence of the stimulus identification priming. With a 
figure identification and counting task, we demonstrate a small but significant 
priming contribution to this attention-switching cost. Furthermore, through 
64-channel event-related potential (ERP) recordings, we found two ERP correlates 
(at 280 ms and 388 ms) of this internal attention-switching function. Source 
localization analysis shows dynamic brain activation starts from the 
temporal-occipital region and finishes in the left prefrontal cortex. The 
occipital-prefrontal and cingulate-prefrontal co-activations were orderly 
observed. We discuss the present ERP results along with our previous fMRI 
findings and suggest a dominant role of the left prefrontal cortex associated 
with attention shifts in verbal working memory.

DOI: 10.1016/j.brainres.2006.01.032
PMID: 16527259 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


217. J Hum Evol. 2003 Apr;44(4):401-29. doi: 10.1016/s0047-2484(03)00028-9.

Expansion of the neocerebellum in Hominoidea.

MacLeod CE(1), Zilles K, Schleicher A, Rilling JK, Gibson KR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Anthropology, Langara College, 100 West 49 Avenue, Vancouver, 
BC, V5Y 2Z6 Canada. caroleli@sfu.ca

Erratum in
    J Hum Evol. 2003 Sep;45(3):261.

Technological and conceptual breakthroughs have led to more serious 
consideration of the cerebellum as an essential element in cognition. Recent 
studies show the lateral cerebellum, seat of the neocerebellum, to be most 
active in cognitive tasks. An examination of the relative volumes of the 
cerebellar hemispheres in anthropoids would reveal whether some groups show 
greater neocerebellar development through hemispheric expansion beyond expected 
allometry, implying a greater contribution of the lateral hemispheres to 
cognition. This study expands the existing data on primate brain and brain part 
volumes by incorporating data from both magnetic resonance scans and 
histological sections for a total sample size of 97 specimens, including 42 
apes, 14 humans and 41 monkeys. The resulting volumes of whole brain, 
cerebellum, vermis, and hemisphere enable a reliable linear regression contrast 
between hominoids and monkeys, and demonstrate a striking increase in the 
lateral cerebellum in hominoids. The uniformity of the grade shift suggests that 
this increase took place in the common ancestor to the hominoids. The importance 
of the neocerebellum in visual-spatial skills, planning of complex movements, 
procedural learning, attention switching, and sensory discrimination in 
manipulation would facilitate the adaptation of these early hominoids to 
frugivory and suspensory feeding.

DOI: 10.1016/s0047-2484(03)00028-9
PMID: 12727461 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


218. Neuroimage. 2013 Jan 1;64:485-95. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2012.09.042. Epub 
2012 Sep 20.

A fNIRS investigation of switching and inhibition during the modified Stroop 
task in younger and older adults.

Laguë-Beauvais M(1), Brunet J, Gagnon L, Lesage F, Bherer L.

Author information:
(1)Université du Québec à Montréal, Département de Psychologie, CP 8888, 
Succursale Centre-ville, Montréal, Québec, Canada H3C 3P8.

Brain imaging studies have reported age-related differences in brain activation 
for attentional control functions, such as inhibition and task-switching. 
However, age-related differences in brain activation patterns in more than one 
attentional control task have rarely been studied in the same group of 
participants. In this study, younger and older adults completed a modified 
Stroop task with interference and switching conditions, using functional near 
infra-red spectroscopy. While interference did not reveal any significant 
activation of the prefrontal cortex in younger adults, switching produced an 
increased activation bilaterally in both the anterior dorsolateral prefrontal 
cortex (DLPFC) and the anterior ventrolateral prefrontal cortex (VLPFC). In 
older adults, an isolated right and left anterior DLPFC activation was observed 
even in the non-executive conditions of the Stroop task (color denomination) and 
the interference condition revealed activation mostly in the posterior left 
DLPFC and bilateral VLPFC with a small right anterior DLPFC component. Specific 
to older adults, switching induced an increased activation spread out 
bilaterally over the prefrontal cortex in the bilateral anterior DLPFC, the 
posterior left DLPFC and bilateral VLPFC. These results suggest that for both 
older and younger adults, inhibition and switching are associated with distinct 
patterns of prefrontal activation and that age-related differences exist in 
these patterns such that prefrontal activation seems to be more spread out at 
different sites in older adults.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2012.09.042
PMID: 23000257 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Neuroimage. 2019 Aug 15;197:344-353. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2019.04.072. Epub 
2019 May 3.

Error-preceding brain activity links neural markers of task preparation to 
cognitive stability and flexibility.

Steinhauser R(1), Steinhauser M(2).

Author information:
(1)Catholic University of Eichstätt-Ingolstadt, Germany. Electronic address: 
Robert.Steinhauser@ku.de.
(2)Catholic University of Eichstätt-Ingolstadt, Germany.

Balancing stability and flexibility is required to facilitate successful task 
selection in situations with competing stimuli. Research suggests a set of 
counteracting control processes that maintains this balance. In the present 
study, we investigate how two neural correlates of task preparation in 
event-related potentials (ERPs), the mixing positivity and the switch 
positivity, can be linked to stability and flexibility in task selection. In a 
cued task switching paradigm, we analyzed deviations of these ERPs when task 
confusions occurred, that is, when participants erroneously executed the 
currently irrelevant task. We found a reduced mixing positivity to be a main 
source of task confusions in a task environment that required ongoing switches 
between competing tasks, whereas the switch positivity was uninvolved here. 
However, an overabundance of this latter component was a source of task 
confusions in a task environment that required the repetitive execution of the 
same task, although task switches were not required at all in this condition. 
These results not only highlight the distinct functional significance of the two 
preparatory ERPs and show that control processes can be maladaptive in certain 
contexts. They can also be utilized to locate the mixing positivity and the 
switch positivity on the stability-flexibility spectrum. Our results are in line 
with accounts that suggest that a balance between stability and flexibility is 
facilitated by the concurrent involvement of two control processes. One that 
manages the top-down bias of the relevant task set and one that increases or 
decreases competition between alternatively available stimuli.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2019.04.072
PMID: 31055042 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2006 May 2;103(18):7186-91. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.0509550103. Epub 2006 Apr 21.

Computational and neurobiological mechanisms underlying cognitive flexibility.

Badre D(1), Wagner AD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology and Neurosciences Program, Stanford University, 
Stanford, CA 94305, USA. dbadre@berkeley.edu

The ability to switch between multiple tasks is central to flexible behavior. 
Although switching between tasks is readily accomplished, a well established 
consequence of task switching (TS) is behavioral slowing. The source of this 
switch cost and the contribution of cognitive control to its resolution remain 
highly controversial. Here, we tested whether proactive interference arising 
from memory places fundamental constraints on flexible performance, and whether 
prefrontal control processes contribute to overcoming these constraints. 
Event-related functional MRI indexed neural responses during TS. The 
contributions of cognitive control and interference were made theoretically 
explicit in a computational model of task performance. Model estimates of two 
levels of proactive interference, "conceptual conflict" and "response conflict," 
produced distinct preparation-related profiles. Left ventrolateral prefrontal 
cortical activation paralleled model estimates of conceptual conflict, 
dissociating from that in left inferior parietal cortex, which paralleled model 
estimates of response conflict. These computationally informed neural measures 
specify retrieved conceptual representations as a source of conflict during TS 
and suggest that left ventrolateral prefrontal cortex resolves this conflict to 
facilitate flexible performance.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0509550103
PMCID: PMC1459038
PMID: 16632612 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement: No conflicts 
declared.


221. Hum Brain Mapp. 2016 Apr;37(4):1335-48. doi: 10.1002/hbm.23104. Epub 2016 Jan 
20.

Alterations in neural systems mediating cognitive flexibility and inhibition in 
mood disorders.

Piguet C(1), Cojan Y(1), Sterpenich V(1), Desseilles M(1)(2), Bertschy G(3), 
Vuilleumier P(1).

Author information:
(1)Neuroscience Department, Faculty of Medicine, University of Geneva, 
Switzerland.
(2)Cyclotron Research Center, University of Liege, Belgium.
(3)Department of Psychiatry and Mental Health, Strasbourg University Hospital, 
University of Strasbourg, INSERMu666, France.

Impairment in mental flexibility may be a key component contributing to cardinal 
cognitive symptoms among mood disorders patients, particularly thought control 
disorders. Impaired ability to switch from one thought to another might reflect 
difficulties in either generating new mental states, inhibiting previous states, 
or both. However, the neural underpinnings of impaired cognitive flexibility in 
mood disorders remain largely unresolved. We compared a group of mood disorders 
patients (n = 29) and a group of matched healthy subjects (n = 32) on a novel 
task-switching paradigm involving happy and sad faces, that allowed us to 
separate generation of a new mental set (Switch Cost) and inhibition of the 
previous set during switching (Inhibition Cost), using fMRI. Behavioral data 
showed a larger Switch Cost in patients relative to controls, but the average 
Inhibition Cost did not differ between groups. At the neural level, a main 
effect of group was found with stronger activation of the subgenual cingulate 
cortex in patients. The larger Switch Cost in patients was reflected by a 
stronger recruitment of brain regions involved in attention and executive 
control, including the left intraparietal sulcus, precuneus, left inferior 
fontal gyrus, and right anterior cingulate. Critically, activity in the 
subgenual cingulate cortex was not downregulated by inhibition in patients 
relative to controls. In conclusion, mood disorder patients have exaggerated 
Switch Cost relative to controls, and this deficit in cognitive flexibility is 
associated with increased activation of the fronto-parietal attention networks, 
combined with impaired modulation of the subgenual cingulate cortex when 
inhibition of previous mental states is needed.

© 2016 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/hbm.23104
PMCID: PMC6867498
PMID: 26787138 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


222. AIDS Care. 2016;28(4):436-40. doi: 10.1080/09540121.2015.1112347. Epub 2015 Nov 
17.

Behavioral and neuroimaging evidence for impaired executive function in 
"cognitively normal" older HIV-infected adults.

Jiang X(1), Barasky R(2), Olsen H(2), Riesenhuber M(1), Magnus M(2).

Author information:
(1)a Department of Neuroscience , Georgetown University Medical Center , 
Washington , DC , USA.
(2)b Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics , The George Washington 
University School of Public Health and Health Services , Washington , DC , USA.

Erratum in
    AIDS Care. 2016;28(6):805. doi: 10.1080/09540121.2016.1138625.

The increased prevalence of HIV among adults >50 years underscores the 
importance of improving our understanding of mechanisms causing HIV-associated 
neurocognitive disorders (HAND). Identifying novel and noninvasive diagnostic 
predictors of HAND prior to clinical manifestation is critical to ultimately 
identifying means of preventing progression to symptomatic HAND. Here, using a 
task-switching paradigm, in which subjects were cued (unpredictably) to perform 
a face-gender or a word-semantic task on superimposed face and word images, we 
examined the behavioral and neural profile of impaired cognitive control in 
older HIV + adults (N = 14, 9 HIV+). Functional magnetic resonance imaging 
(fMRI) and behavioral data were acquired while subjects were performing the 
face-gender or word-semantic task. We found that, despite comparable performance 
in standard neuropsychology tests that are designed to probe executive deficits, 
HIV-infected participants were significantly slower than uninfected controls in 
adapting to change in task demand, and the behavioral impairments can be 
quantitatively related to difference in fMRI signal at the dorsal anterior 
cingulate cortex (ACC). Due to the limited sample size of this 
hypothesis-generating study, we should take caution with these findings and 
future studies with a large and better matched sample size are needed. However, 
these rather novel findings in this study have a few important implications: 
first, the prevalence of cognitive impairments in HIV+ older adults might be 
even higher than previously proposed; second, ACC (in particularly its dorsal 
region) might be one of the key regions underlying cognitive impairments (in 
particularly executive functions) in HIV; and third, it might be beneficial to 
adopt paradigms developed and validated in cognitive neuroscience to study HAND, 
as these techniques might be more sensitive to some aspects of HIV-associated 
neurocognitive impairments than standard neuropsychology tests.

DOI: 10.1080/09540121.2015.1112347
PMCID: PMC5345567
PMID: 26573559 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


223. Mol Autism. 2024 Oct 8;15(1):44. doi: 10.1186/s13229-024-00623-3.

Superior temporal sulcus folding, functional network connectivity, and 
autistic-like traits in a non-clinical population.

Nenadić I(1)(2)(3)(4), Schröder Y(5), Hoffmann J(5), Evermann U(5)(6), Pfarr 
JK(5)(6), Bergmann A(5), Hohmann DM(5)(6), Keil B(6)(7)(8)(9), Abu-Akel 
A(10)(11), Stroth S(6)(12), Kamp-Becker I(6)(12), Jansen A(6)(13), Grezellschak 
S(5), Meller T(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Cognitive Neuropsychiatry Lab, Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, 
Philipps-Universität Marburg, Rudolf-Bultmann-Str. 8, 35037, Marburg, Germany. 
nenadic@staff.uni-marburg.de.
(2)Center for Mind, Brain, and Behavior (CMBB), University of Marburg, Justus 
Liebig University Gießen, and Technical University of Darmstadt, 
Hans-Meerwein-Straße 6, 35032, Marburg, Germany. nenadic@staff.uni-marburg.de.
(3)Marburg University Hospital - UKGM, Marburg, Germany. 
nenadic@staff.uni-marburg.de.
(4)LOEWE Center DYNAMIC, University of Marburg, Marburg, Germany. 
nenadic@staff.uni-marburg.de.
(5)Cognitive Neuropsychiatry Lab, Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, 
Philipps-Universität Marburg, Rudolf-Bultmann-Str. 8, 35037, Marburg, Germany.
(6)Center for Mind, Brain, and Behavior (CMBB), University of Marburg, Justus 
Liebig University Gießen, and Technical University of Darmstadt, 
Hans-Meerwein-Straße 6, 35032, Marburg, Germany.
(7)Institute of Medical Physics and Radiation Protection, Department of Life 
Science Engineering, TH Mittelhessen University of Applied Sciences, Giessen, 
Germany.
(8)LOEWE Research Cluster for Advanced Medical Physics in Imaging and Therapy 
(ADMIT), TH Mittelhessen University of Applied Sciences, 35390, Giessen, 
Germany.
(9)Department of Diagnostic and Interventional Radiology, University Hospital 
Marburg, Philipps-Universität Marburg, Marburg, Germany.
(10)School of Psychological Sciences, University of Haifa, Haifa, Israel.
(11)The Haifa Brain and Behavior Hub (HBBH), University of Haifa, Haifa, Israel.
(12)Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, 
Philipps-Universität Marburg, Marburg, Germany.
(13)BrainImaging Core Facility, School of Medicine, Philipps-Universität 
Marburg, Marburg, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Autistic-like traits (ALT) are prevalent across the general 
population and might be linked to some facets of a broader autism spectrum 
disorder (ASD) phenotype. Recent studies suggest an association of these traits 
with both genetic and brain structural markers in non-autistic individuals, 
showing similar spatial location of findings observed in ASD and thus suggesting 
a potential neurobiological continuum.
METHODS: In this study, we first tested an association of ALTs (assessed with 
the AQ questionnaire) with cortical complexity, a cortical surface marker of 
early neurodevelopment, and then the association with disrupted functional 
connectivity. We analysed structural T1-weighted and resting-state functional 
MRI scans in 250 psychiatrically healthy individuals without a history of early 
developmental disorders, in a first step using the CAT12 toolbox for cortical 
complexity analysis and in a second step we used regional cortical complexity 
findings to apply the CONN toolbox for seed-based functional connectivity 
analysis.
RESULTS: Our findings show a significant negative correlation of both AQ total 
and AQ attention switching subscores with left superior temporal sulcus (STS) 
cortical folding complexity, with the former being significantly correlated with 
STS to left lateral occipital cortex connectivity, while the latter showed 
significant positive correlation of STS to left inferior/middle frontal gyrus 
connectivity (n = 233; all p < 0.05, FWE cluster-level corrected). Additional 
analyses also revealed a significant correlation of AQ attention to detail 
subscores with STS to left lateral occipital cortex connectivity.
LIMITATIONS: Phenotyping might affect association results (e.g. choice of 
inventories); in addition, our study was limited to subclinical expressions of 
autistic-like traits.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings provide further evidence for biological correlates of 
ALT even in the absence of clinical ASD, while establishing a link between 
structural variation of early developmental origin and functional connectivity.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13229-024-00623-3
PMCID: PMC11463051
PMID: 39380071 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.


224. Neuroimage. 2009 Mar 1;45(1):191-7. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2008.11.019. Epub 
2008 Dec 6.

ERP indices of persisting and current inhibitory control: a study of saccadic 
task switching.

Mueller SC(1), Swainson R, Jackson GM.

Author information:
(1)School of Psychology, University of Nottingham, UK. msven@mail.nih.gov

Previous studies have found that inhibition of a biologically dominant prepotent 
response tendency is required during the execution of a less familiar, 
non-prepotent response. However, the lasting impact of this inhibition and the 
cognitive mechanisms to flexibly switch between prepotent and non-prepotent 
responses are poorly understood. We examined the neurophysiological (ERP) 
correlates of switching between prosaccade and antisaccade responses in 22 
healthy volunteers. The behavioural data showed significant switch costs in 
terms of response latency for the prosaccade task only. These costs occurred 
exclusively in trials when preparation for the switch was limited to 300 ms, 
suggesting that inhibition of the prepotent prosaccade task either passively 
dissipated or was actively overcome during the longer 1000 ms preparation 
interval. In the neurophysiological data, a late frontal negativity (LFN) was 
visible during preparation for a switch to the prosaccade task that was absent 
when switching to the antisaccade task, which may reflect the overcoming of 
persisting inhibition. During task implementation both saccade types were 
associated with a late parietal positivity (LPP) for switch relative to 
repetition trials, possibly indicating attentional reorienting to the 
switched-to task, and visible only with short preparation intervals. When the 
prosaccade and antisaccade task were contrasted directly during task 
implementation, the antisaccade task exhibited increased stimulus-locked N2 and 
decreased P3 amplitudes indicative of active inhibition. The present findings 
indicate that neurophysiological markers of persisting and current inhibition 
can be revealed using a prosaccade/antisaccade-switching task.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2008.11.019
PMID: 19100841 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


225. Neuropsychologia. 2005;43(3):340-55. doi: 
10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2004.06.014.

Advance preparation and stimulus-induced interference in cued task switching: 
further insights from BOLD fMRI.

Ruge H(1), Brass M, Koch I, Rubin O, Meiran N, von Cramon DY.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cognitive Neurology, Max Planck Institute for Human Cognitive 
and Brain Sciences, Leipzig, Germany. hruge@artsci.wustl.edu

To switch from one cognitive task to another is thought to rely on additional 
control effort being indicated by performance costs relative to repeating the 
same task. This switch cost can be reduced by advance task preparation. In the 
present experiment the nature of advance preparation was investigated by 
comparing a situation where an explicit task cue was presented 2000 ms in 
advance of the target stimulus (CTI-2000) with a situation where cue and target 
were presented in close succession (CTI-100). We mapped the 
blood-oxygenation-level-dependent (BOLD) activation correlates of switch-related 
control effort and advance task preparation to test alternative explanations why 
advance preparation is reducing switch costs. A previously reported 
control-related cortical network of frontal and parietal brain areas emerged 
that was more strongly activated for switching between tasks. However, this was 
true exclusively for CTI-100 where no advance task preparation was possible. At 
CTI-2000 these same brain areas were equally engaged in both switch and repeat 
trials. For some of these areas, this common activation was time-locked to the 
presentation of both the cue as well as the target. Other areas were exclusively 
associated with target processing. The overall pattern of results suggests that 
advance task preparation is a common process of pre-activating (cue-locked 
activation) the currently relevant task set which does not face interference 
from a persisting N - 1 task set. During target processing the same brain areas 
are re-engaged (subsequent target-locked activation) to apply the pre-activated 
task set. Though being common to repeat and switch trials, advance preparation 
has a differential benefit for switch trials. This is because the instructed 
task set has time to settle into a stable state, thus becoming resistant against 
disruption from the previous task set, which is retrieved by the current target 
stimulus.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2004.06.014
PMID: 15707612 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


226. Front Hum Neurosci. 2015 Feb 26;9:102. doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2015.00102. 
eCollection 2015.

Brain activations during bimodal dual tasks depend on the nature and combination 
of component tasks.

Salo E(1), Rinne T(2), Salonen O(3), Alho K(4).

Author information:
(1)Division of Cognitive Psychology and Neuropsychology, Institute of 
Behavioural Sciences, University of Helsinki Helsinki, Finland ; Advanced 
Magnetic Imaging Centre, Aalto University School of Science and Technology 
Espoo, Finland.
(2)Division of Cognitive Psychology and Neuropsychology, Institute of 
Behavioural Sciences, University of Helsinki Helsinki, Finland.
(3)Helsinki Medical Imaging Center, Helsinki University Central Hospital 
Helsinki, Finland.
(4)Division of Cognitive Psychology and Neuropsychology, Institute of 
Behavioural Sciences, University of Helsinki Helsinki, Finland ; Helsinki 
Collegium for Advanced Studies, University of Helsinki Helsinki, Finland ; 
Swedish Collegium for Advanced Study Uppsala, Sweden.

We used functional magnetic resonance imaging to investigate brain activations 
during nine different dual tasks in which the participants were required to 
simultaneously attend to concurrent streams of spoken syllables and written 
letters. They performed a phonological, spatial or "simple" (speaker-gender or 
font-shade) discrimination task within each modality. We expected to find 
activations associated specifically with dual tasking especially in the frontal 
and parietal cortices. However, no brain areas showed systematic dual task 
enhancements common for all dual tasks. Further analysis revealed that dual 
tasks including component tasks that were according to Baddeley's model 
"modality atypical," that is, the auditory spatial task or the visual 
phonological task, were not associated with enhanced frontal activity. In 
contrast, for other dual tasks, activity specifically associated with dual 
tasking was found in the left or bilateral frontal cortices. Enhanced activation 
in parietal areas, however, appeared not to be specifically associated with dual 
tasking per se, but rather with intermodal attention switching. We also expected 
effects of dual tasking in left frontal supramodal phonological processing areas 
when both component tasks required phonological processing and in right parietal 
supramodal spatial processing areas when both tasks required spatial processing. 
However, no such effects were found during these dual tasks compared with their 
component tasks performed separately. Taken together, the current results 
indicate that activations during dual tasks depend in a complex manner on 
specific demands of component tasks.

DOI: 10.3389/fnhum.2015.00102
PMCID: PMC4341542
PMID: 25767443


227. Neuropsychology. 2005 May;19(3):362-370. doi: 10.1037/0894-4105.19.3.362.

Task switching after cerebellar damage.

Berger A(1), Sadeh M(2), Tzur G(1), Shuper A(3), Kornreich L(4), Inbar D(2), 
Cohen IJ(3), Michowiz S(5), Yaniv I(3), Constantini S(6), Kessler Y(1), Merian 
N(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Behavioral Sciences and Zlotowski Center for Neuroscience, 
Ben-Gurion University of the Negev.
(2)Child Development and Rehabilitation Department, Schneider Children's Medical 
Center.
(3)Hematology and Oncology Department, Schneider Children's Medical Center.
(4)Imaging Department, Schneider Children's Medical Center.
(5)Pediatric Neurosurgery Department, Schneider Children's Medical Center.
(6)Department of Pediatric Neurosurgery, Dana Children's Hospital, Tel Aviv 
Medical Center.

The authors of this study investigated task switching following cerebellar 
damage. The study group consisted of 7 children and adolescents (M age=13.8 
years) who underwent surgical removal of a benign posterior fossa tumor. They 
were tested at a sufficient interval after surgery (M lag=6.13 years) for 
restoration of normal cognitive skills and intelligence. Although all showed 
normal learning of the task compared with control participants, when rapid 
behavioral changes were required (short preparation time), they exhibited 
behavioral rigidity manifested by enhanced switching cost. These results are in 
line with another study on serial reaction time with the same patients (A. 
Berger et al., in press). They have important implications for our understanding 
of the cognitive sequelae of early cerebellar damage as well as the involvement 
of the cerebellum in task switching.

Copyright (c) 2005 APA, all rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1037/0894-4105.19.3.362
PMID: 15910122 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


228. Neurosci Res. 2016 Feb;103:18-26. doi: 10.1016/j.neures.2015.06.011. Epub 2015 
Jul 18.

Investigation of age-related changes in brain activity during the divalent 
task-switching paradigm using functional MRI.

Kunimi M(1), Kiyama S(2), Nakai T(2).

Author information:
(1)National Center for Geriatrics and Gerontology, Japan. Electronic address: 
kunimi@ncgg.go.jp.
(2)National Center for Geriatrics and Gerontology, Japan.

This study compared the brain activation of young and older subjects during the 
use of the task-switching paradigm (TSP) at various task speeds to examine the 
relationship between task load and brain activation. Specifically, it attempted 
to examine whether the task load-dependent BOLD response gradient is a useful 
tool for functional magnetic resonance imaging-based assessments of age-related 
changes in cognitive function. We predicted that the extent of the activation of 
the brain regions responsible for task-set reconfiguration and the inhibition of 
task switching functions induced during the performance of a TSP-based task 
would vary according to age. Task difficulty was controlled by altering the 
inter-stimulus interval. Although similar brain regions were activated in both 
age groups, significant differences in the extent of the activation were 
detected between the young and older groups. In particular, some regions were 
activated in the older group, but not the young group. This study indicated that 
TSP-based task performance-induced activation of the brain regions linked to 
executive function increases with age and that the degree and pattern of such 
activation depend on the content and difficulty of the task being performed. 
This indicates that the age- and task difficulty-dependent augmentation of brain 
activation varies between brain regions.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd and the Japan Neuroscience Society. All 
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neures.2015.06.011
PMID: 26193452 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


229. Cereb Cortex. 2015 Jan;25(1):138-46. doi: 10.1093/cercor/bht212. Epub 2013 Aug 
19.

Reduced frontal cortex efficiency is associated with lower white matter 
integrity in aging.

Zhu Z(1), Johnson NF(1), Kim C(2), Gold BT(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology.
(2)Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology Department of Psychology, Kyungpook 
National University, Daegu 702-701, South Korea.
(3)Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology Magnetic Resonance Imaging and 
Spectroscopy Center Sanders-Brown Center on Aging, University of Kentucky, 
Lexington, KY 40536, USA and.

Increased frontal cortex activation during cognitive task performance is common 
in aging but remains poorly understood. Here we explored patterns of age-related 
frontal brain activations under multiple task performance conditions and their 
relationship to white matter (WM) microstructure. Groups of younger (N = 28) and 
older (N = 33) participants completed a task-switching paradigm while functional 
magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) was performed, and rested while diffusion 
tensor imaging was performed. Results from fMRI analyses indicated age-related 
increases in frontal brain activations under conditions of poorer performance in 
the older group (the nonswitch and switch conditions) and for a contrast in 
which behavioral performance was equated (older group nonswitch condition vs. 
younger group switch condition). Within the older adult group, higher frontal 
activation was associated with poorer behavioral performance under all task 
conditions. In 2 regions in right frontal cortex, blood oxygen level-dependent 
(BOLD) magnitudes were negatively correlated with WM integrity in tracts 
connecting these structures with other task-relevant frontoparietal and striatal 
regions. Our results link age-related declines in the efficiency of frontal 
cortex functioning with lower WM integrity in aging.

© The Author 2013. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. 
For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/cercor/bht212
PMCID: PMC4259278
PMID: 23960206 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Cogn Affect Behav Neurosci. 2005 Jun;5(2):127-43. doi: 10.3758/cabn.5.2.127.

Toward a taxonomy of attention shifting: individual differences in fMRI during 
multiple shift types.

Wager TD(1), Jonides J, Smith EE, Nichols TE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Columbia University, 1190 Amsterdam Ave., New York, 
NY 10027, USA. tor@paradox.psych.columbia.edu

Although task switching is often considered one of the fundamental abilities 
underlying executive functioning and general intelligence, there is little 
evidence that switching is a unitary construct and little evidence regarding the 
relationship between brain activity and switching performance. We examined 
individual differences in multiple types of attention shifting in order to 
determine whether behavioral performance and fMRI activity are correlated across 
different types of shifting. The participants (n = 39) switched between objects 
and attributes both when stimuli were perceptually available (external) and when 
stimuli were stored in memory (internal). We found that there were more 
switch-related activations in many regions associated with executive 
control--including the dorsolateral and medial prefrontal and parietal 
cortices--when behavioral switch costs were higher (poor performance). 
Conversely, activation in the ventromedial prefrontal cortex (VMPFC) and the 
rostral anterior cingulate was consistently correlated with good performance, 
suggesting a general role for these areas in efficient attention shifting. We 
discuss these findings in terms of a model of cognitive-emotional interaction in 
attention shifting, in which reward-related signals in the VMPFC guide efficient 
selection of tasks in the lateral prefrontal and parietal cortices.

DOI: 10.3758/cabn.5.2.127
PMID: 16180620 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


231. J Neurosci. 2018 Mar 7;38(10):2495-2504. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2724-17.2018. 
Epub 2018 Feb 2.

Bottom-Up and Top-Down Factors Differentially Influence Stimulus Representations 
Across Large-Scale Attentional Networks.

Long NM(1), Kuhl BA(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Oregon, Eugene, Oregon 97402 
niclong@uoregon.edu bkuhl@uoregon.edu.

Visual attention is thought to be supported by three large-scale frontoparietal 
networks: the frontoparietal control network (FPCN), the dorsal attention 
network (DAN), and the ventral attention network (VAN). The traditional view is 
that these networks support visual attention by biasing and evaluating sensory 
representations in visual cortical regions. However, recent evidence suggests 
that frontoparietal regions actively represent perceptual stimuli. Here, we 
assessed how perceptual stimuli are represented across large-scale 
frontoparietal and visual networks. Specifically, we tested whether 
representations of stimulus features across these networks are differentially 
sensitive to bottom-up and top-down factors. In a pair of pattern-based fMRI 
studies, male and female human subjects made perceptual decisions about face 
images that varied along two independent dimensions: gender and affect. Across 
studies, we interrupted bottom-up visual input using backward masks. Within 
studies, we manipulated which stimulus features were goal relevant (i.e., 
whether gender or affect was relevant) and task switching (i.e., whether the 
goal on the current trial matched the goal on the prior trial). We found that 
stimulus features could be reliably decoded from all four networks and, 
importantly, that subregions within each attentional network maintained coherent 
representations. Critically, the different attentional manipulations 
(interruption, goal relevance, and task switching) differentially influenced 
feature representations across networks. Whereas visual interruption had a 
relatively greater influence on representations in visual regions, goal 
relevance and task switching had a relatively greater influence on 
representations in frontoparietal networks. Therefore, large-scale brain 
networks can be dissociated according to how attention influences the feature 
representations that they maintain.SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT Visual attention is 
supported by multiple frontoparietal attentional networks. However, it remains 
unclear how stimulus features are represented within these networks and how they 
are influenced by attention. Here, we assessed feature representations in four 
large-scale networks using a perceptual decision-making paradigm in which we 
manipulated top-down and bottom-up factors. We found that top-down manipulations 
such as goal relevance and task switching modulated feature representations in 
attentional networks, whereas bottom-up manipulations such as interruption of 
visual processing had a relatively stronger influence on feature representations 
in visual regions. Together, these findings indicate that attentional networks 
actively represent stimulus features and that representations within different 
large-scale networks are influenced by different forms of attention.

Copyright © 2018 the authors 0270-6474/18/382495-10$15.00/0.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2724-17.2018
PMCID: PMC5858593
PMID: 29437930 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


232. Neurobiol Aging. 2014 Mar;35(3):548-55. doi: 
10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2013.09.007. Epub 2013 Oct 9.

Executive dysfunction and gray matter atrophy in amnestic mild cognitive 
impairment.

Zheng D(1), Sun H, Dong X, Liu B, Xu Y, Chen S, Song L, Zhang H, Wang X.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Shengjing Hospital of China Medical University, 
Shenyang, China.

Recent studies have shown that impairment in executive function (EF) is common 
in patients with amnestic mild cognitive impairment (aMCI). However, the 
neuroanatomic basis of executive impairment in patients with aMCI remains 
unclear. In this study, multiple regression voxel-based morphometry analyses 
were used to examine the relationship between regional gray matter volumes and 
EF performance in 50 patients with aMCI and 48 healthy age-matched controls. The 
core EF components (response inhibition, working memory and task switching, 
based on the EF model of Miyake et al) were accessed with computerized tasks. 
Atrophic brain areas related to decreases in the three EF components in patients 
with aMCI were located in the frontal and temporal cortices. Within the frontal 
cortex, the brain region related to response inhibition was identified in the 
right inferior frontal gyrus. Brain regions related to working memory were 
located in the left anterior cingulate gyrus, left premotor cortex, and right 
inferior frontal gyrus, and brain regions related to task shifting were 
distributed in the bilateral frontal cortex. Atrophy in the right inferior 
frontal gyrus was most closely associated with a decrease in all three EF 
components in patients with aMCI. Our data, from the perspective of brain 
morphology, contribute to a better understanding of the role of these brain 
areas in the neural network of EF.

Copyright © 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2013.09.007
PMID: 24119547 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


233. J Neurosci. 2011 Jan 19;31(3):922-7. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0420-10.2011.

Hearing while blinking: multisensory attentional blink revisited.

Haroush K(1), Deouell LY, Hochstein S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurobiology, Hebrew University, Jerusalem 91904, Israel. 
kharoush@gmail.com

It is well established that cognitive system overload is reflected in the 
attentional blink (AB), the failure to report a second target when it closely 
follows detection of a first target within a rapid series of stimuli. However, 
there is intense controversy concerning the effect of first-target detection in 
one modality on subsequent dynamics of attentional resources in other 
modalities. Mixed results were found using an audiovisual AB paradigm: depletion 
of resources in one modality either impaired performance in the other modality 
or had no effect. Here, we circumvent the need for task switching by measuring 
an event-related potential, the mismatch negativity, which reflects implicit 
auditory change detection without requiring task engagement and is present even 
for background sounds that participants ignore. Surprisingly, we find that 
during the visual AB, auditory processing is enhanced rather than inhibited, as 
would be expected by system overload. We suggest that multimodal attentional 
resources may be freed rather than engaged during the visual AB. Suppression of 
irrelevant input may require active control by a central executive, which is 
preoccupied during the visual AB, and/or there may be no reason to suppress 
other-modal input since the visual system will miss its second target anyway.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0420-10.2011
PMCID: PMC6632914
PMID: 21248117 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


234. Neuropsychologia. 2012 Dec;50(14):3509-18. doi: 
10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2012.09.039. Epub 2012 Sep 27.

Age differences of multivariate network expressions during task-switching and 
their associations with behavior.

Gazes Y(1), Rakitin BC, Habeck C, Steffener J, Stern Y.

Author information:
(1)Columbia University, Taub Institute, 630 West 168th Street, P & S Box 16, New 
York, NY 10032, USA.

The effect of aging on functional network activation associated with 
task-switching was examined in 24 young (age=25.2±2.73 years) and 23 older 
adults (age=65.2±2.65 years) using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI). 
The study goals were to (1) identify a network shared by both young and older 
adults, (2) identify additional networks in each age group, and (3) examine the 
relationship between the networks identified and behavioral performance in 
task-switching. Ordinal trend covariance analysis was used to identify the 
networks, which takes advantage of increasing activation with greater task 
demand to isolate the network of regions recruited by task-switching. Two 
task-related networks were found: a shared network that was strongly expressed 
by both young and older adults and a second network identified in the young data 
that was residualized from the shared network. Both networks consisted of 
regions associated with task-switching in previous studies including the middle 
frontal gyrus, the precentral gyrus, the anterior cingulate, and the superior 
parietal lobule. Not only was pattern expression of the shared network 
associated with reaction time in both age groups, the difference in the pattern 
expression across task conditions (task-switch minus single-task) was also 
correlated with the difference in RT across task conditions. On the contrary, 
expression of the young-residual network showed a large age effect such that 
older adults do not increase expression of the network with greater task demand 
as young adults do and correlation between expression and accuracy was 
significant only for young adults. Thus, while a network related to RT is 
preserved in older adults, a different network related to accuracy is disrupted.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2012.09.039
PMCID: PMC3518579
PMID: 23022432 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


235. Brain Res. 2007 Jul 9;1157:56-65. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2007.04.046. Epub 2007 
Apr 24.

Behavioural and neurophysiological correlates of bivalent and univalent 
responses during task switching.

Mueller SC(1), Swainson R, Jackson GM.

Author information:
(1)School of Psychology, University of Nottingham, UK.

A hallmark of human behaviour is its flexibility. In any given circumstance 
there is typically a range of possible responses that could be selected. In the 
current study participants were presented with stimulus displays that afforded 
two simple cognitive tasks and were required to switch predictably between them. 
The judgements for each task were either uniquely mapped onto separate effectors 
(univalent conditions) or else mapped onto shared effectors (bivalent 
condition). The results demonstrated that whilst behavioural switch costs were 
similar across the mapping conditions, these conditions differed in the patterns 
of brain activity observed during task preparation and early visual processing 
of the target. Specifically, a cue-locked switch-related late frontal negativity 
was present over frontal sensors for the bivalent condition only, and a 
target-locked N1 over occipital sensors was larger in the bivalent condition 
than the univalent conditions. In contrast, a switch-related target-locked P3b 
component was common to all mapping conditions. These findings are discussed 
with respect to differences in processing demands for switching between tasks 
with bivalent versus univalent responses.

DOI: 10.1016/j.brainres.2007.04.046
PMID: 17544384 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


236. J Neurosci. 2016 Feb 10;36(6):1962-70. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3266-15.2016.

β-Amyloid Deposition Is Associated with Decreased Right Prefrontal Activation 
during Task Switching among Cognitively Normal Elderly.

Oh H(1), Steffener J(2), Razlighi QR(2), Habeck C(2), Stern Y(2).

Author information:
(1)Cognitive Neuroscience Division, Department of Neurology, Columbia University 
College of Physicians and Surgeons, New York, New York 10032-3784 
hwamee.oh@columbia.edu.
(2)Cognitive Neuroscience Division, Department of Neurology, Columbia University 
College of Physicians and Surgeons, New York, New York 10032-3784.

The accumulation of β-amyloid (Aβ) peptides, a pathological hallmark of 
Alzheimer's disease (AD), has been associated with functional alterations, often 
in an episodic memory system with a particular emphasis on medial temporal lobe 
function. The topography of Aβ deposition, however, largely overlaps with 
frontoparietal control (FPC) regions implicated in cognitive control that has 
been shown to be impaired in early mild AD. To understand the neural mechanism 
underlying early changes in cognitive control with AD, we examined the impact of 
Aβ deposition on task-evoked FPC activation using functional magnetic resonance 
imaging (fMRI) in humans. Forty-three young and 62 cognitively normal older 
adults underwent an fMRI session during an executive contextual task in which 
task difficulty varied: single (either letter case or vowel/consonant judgment 
task) vs dual (switching between letter case and vowel/consonant decisions) 
task. Older subjects additionally completed (18)F-florbetaben positron emission 
tomography scans and were classified as either amyloid positive (Aβ+) or 
negative (Aβ-). Consistent with previous reports, age-related increases in brain 
activity were found in FPC regions commonly identified across groups. For both 
task conditions, Aβ-related increases in brain activity were found compared with 
baseline activity. For higher cognitive control load, however, Aβ+ elderly 
showed reduced task-switching activation in the right inferior frontal cortex. 
Our findings suggest that with Aβ deposition, brain activation in the cognitive 
control region reaches a maximum with lower control demand and decreases with 
higher control demand, which may underlie early impairment in cognitive control 
with AD progression.
SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT: The accumulation of β-amyloid (Aβ) peptides, a 
pathological hallmark of Alzheimer's disease, spatially overlaps with 
frontoparietal control (FPC) regions implicated in cognitive control, but the 
impact of Aβ deposition on FPC regions is largely unknown. Using functional 
magnetic resonance imaging with a task-switching task, we found Aβ-related 
increases in FPC regions compared with baseline activity. For higher cognitive 
control load, however, Aβ-related hypoactivity was found in the right inferior 
frontal cortex, a region highly implicated in cognitive control. The findings 
suggest that with Aβ deposition, task-related brain activity may reach a plateau 
early and undergo downstream pathways of neural dysfunction, which may relate to 
the early impairment of cognitive control seen in the progression of Aβ 
pathology.

Copyright © 2016 the authors 0270-6474/16/361962-09$15.00/0.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3266-15.2016
PMCID: PMC4748078
PMID: 26865619 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


237. J Cogn Neurosci. 2021 Aug 1;33(9):1811-1832. doi: 10.1162/jocn_a_01685.

Contributions of Brain Function and Structure to Three Different Domains of 
Cognitive Control in Normal Aging.

Rieck JR(1), Baracchini G(2), Grady CL(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Rotman Research Institute at Baycrest.
(2)McGill University.
(3)University of Toronto.

Cognitive control involves the flexible allocation of mental resources during 
goal-directed behavior and comprises three correlated but distinct 
domains-inhibition, shifting, and working memory. The work of Don Stuss and 
others has demonstrated that frontal and parietal cortices are crucial to 
cognitive control, particularly in normal aging, which is characterized by 
reduced control mechanisms. However, the structure-function relationships 
specific to each domain and subsequent impact on performance are not well 
understood. In the current study, we examined both age and individual 
differences in functional activity associated with core domains of cognitive 
control in relation to fronto-parietal structure and task performance. 
Participants (n = 140, aged 20-86 years) completed three fMRI tasks: go/no-go 
(inhibition), task switching (shifting), and n-back (working memory), in 
addition to structural and diffusion imaging. All three tasks engaged a common 
set of fronto-parietal regions; however, the contributions of age, brain 
structure, and task performance to functional activity were unique to each 
domain. Aging was associated with differences in functional activity for all 
tasks, largely in regions outside common fronto-parietal control regions. 
Shifting and inhibition showed greater contributions of structure to overall 
decreases in brain activity, suggesting that more intact fronto-parietal 
structure may serve as a scaffold for efficient functional response. Working 
memory showed no contribution of structure to functional activity but had strong 
effects of age and task performance. Together, these results provide a 
comprehensive and novel examination of the joint contributions of aging, 
performance, and brain structure to functional activity across multiple domains 
of cognitive control.

© 2021 Massachusetts Institute of Technology.

DOI: 10.1162/jocn_a_01685
PMID: 34375414 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


238. J Cogn Neurosci. 2010 May;22(5):848-59. doi: 10.1162/jocn.2009.21227.

Top-down attentional control in Parkinson's disease: salient considerations.

Cools R(1), Rogers R, Barker RA, Robbins TW.

Author information:
(1)Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition, and Behavior, Radboud University 
Nijmegen Medical Centre, The Netherlands. roshan.cools@donders.ru.nl

Cognitive dysfunction in Parkinson's disease (PD) has been hypothesized to 
reflect a failure of cortical control. In keeping with this hypothesis, some of 
the cognitive deficits in PD resemble those seen in patients with lesions in the 
lateral pFC, which has been associated with top-down attentional control. 
However, there is no direct evidence for a failure of top-down control 
mechanisms in PD. Here we fill this gap by demonstrating disproportionate 
control by bottom-up attention to dimensional salience during attentional set 
shifting. Patients needed significantly more trials to criterion than did 
controls when shifting to a low-salient dimension while, remarkably, needing 
significantly fewer trials to criterion than did controls when shifting to a 
high-salient dimension. Thus, attention was captured by bottom-up attention to 
salient information to a greater extent in patients than in controls. The 
results provide a striking reinterpretation of prior set-shifting data and 
provide the first direct evidence for a failure of top-down attentional control, 
resembling that seen after catecholamine depletion in the pFC.

DOI: 10.1162/jocn.2009.21227
PMID: 19320545 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


239. Brain Cogn. 2017 Jul;115:12-20. doi: 10.1016/j.bandc.2017.03.003. Epub 2017 Mar 
31.

Contextual effects on cognitive control and BOLD activation in single versus 
mixed saccade tasks.

Pierce JE(1), McDowell JE(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Georgia, Athens, GA, United States.
(2)Department of Psychology, University of Georgia, Athens, GA, United States. 
Electronic address: jemcd@uga.edu.

The context or trial history of a task influences response efficiency in mixed 
paradigms based on cognitive control demands for task set selection. In the 
current study, the impact of context on prosaccade and antisaccade trials in 
single and mixed tasks was investigated with BOLD fMRI. Prosaccades require a 
look towards a newly appearing target, while antisaccades require cognitive 
control for prepotent response inhibition and generation of a saccade to the 
opposite location. Results indicated slower prosaccade reaction times and more 
antisaccade errors for switched than repeated or single trials, and slower 
antisaccade reaction times for single than mixed trials. BOLD activation was 
greater for the mixed than the single context in frontal eye fields and 
precuneus, while switch trials had greater activation than repeat trials in 
posterior parietal and middle occipital cortex. Greater antisaccade activation 
was observed overall in saccade circuitry, although effects were evident 
primarily for the mixed task when considered separately. Finally, an interaction 
was observed in superior frontal cortex, precuneus, anterior cingulate, and 
thalamus with strong responses for antisaccade switch trials in the latter two 
regions. Altogether this response pattern demonstrated the sensitivity of 
cognitive control to changing task conditions, especially due to task switching 
costs. Such context-specific differences highlight the importance of trial 
history when assessing cognitive control.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bandc.2017.03.003
PMID: 28371646 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


240. Psychol Med. 2016 Feb;46(3):519-28. doi: 10.1017/S0033291715002019. Epub 2015 
Oct 12.

Default mode network abnormalities during state switching in attention deficit 
hyperactivity disorder.

Sidlauskaite J(1), Sonuga-Barke E(1), Roeyers H(1), Wiersema JR(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental-Clinical and Health Psychology,Ghent 
University,Ghent,Belgium.

BACKGROUND: Individuals with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) 
display excess levels of default mode network (DMN) activity during 
goal-directed tasks, which are associated with attentional disturbances and 
performance decrements. One hypothesis is that this is due to attenuated 
down-regulation of this network during rest-to-task switching. A second related 
hypothesis is that it may be associated with right anterior insula (rAI) 
dysfunction - a region thought to control the actual state-switching process.
METHOD: These hypotheses were tested in the current fMRI study in which 19 
adults with ADHD and 21 typically developing controls undertook a novel 
state-to-state switching paradigm. Advance cues signalled upcoming switches 
between rest and task periods and switch-related anticipatory modulation of DMN 
and rAI was measured. To examine whether rest-to-task switching impairments may 
be a specific example of a more general state regulation deficit, activity upon 
task-to-rest cues was also analysed.
RESULTS: Against our hypotheses, we found that the process of down-regulating 
the DMN when preparing to switch from rest to task was unimpaired in ADHD and 
that there was no switch-specific deficit in rAI modulation. However, 
individuals with ADHD showed difficulties up-regulating the DMN when switching 
from task to rest.
CONCLUSIONS: Rest-to-task DMN attenuation seems to be intact in adults with ADHD 
and thus appears unrelated to excess DMN activity observed during tasks. 
Instead, individuals with ADHD exhibit attenuated up-regulation of the DMN, 
hence suggesting disturbed re-initiation of a rest state.

DOI: 10.1017/S0033291715002019
PMID: 26456561 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


241. Br J Psychiatry. 2008 Jan;192(1):25-31. doi: 10.1192/bjp.bp.107.036558.

Brain activation in paediatric obsessive compulsive disorder during tasks of 
inhibitory control.

Woolley J(1), Heyman I, Brammer M, Frampton I, McGuire PK, Rubia K.

Author information:
(1)Child and Adolescent Psychiatry (PO 46), Institute of Psychiatry, Denmark 
Hill, London SE5 8AF, UK. k.rubia@iop.kcl.ac.uk

BACKGROUND: Obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) may be related to a dysfunction 
in frontostriatal pathways mediating inhibitory control. However, no functional 
magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) study has tested this in children.
AIMS: To test whether adolescents with OCD in partial remission would show 
abnormal frontostriatal brain activation during tasks of inhibition.
METHOD: Event-related fMRI was used to compare brain activation in 10 adolescent 
boys with OCD with that of 9 matched controls during three different tasks of 
inhibitory control.
RESULTS: During a 'stop' task, participants with OCD showed reduced activation 
in right orbitofrontal cortex, thalamus and basal ganglia; inhibition failure 
elicited mesial frontal underactivation. Task switching and interference 
inhibition were associated with attenuated activation in frontal, 
temporoparietal and cerebellar regions.
CONCLUSIONS: These preliminary findings support the hypothesis that paediatric 
OCD is characterised by a dysregulation of frontostriatothalamic brain regions 
necessary for motor inhibition, and also demonstrate dysfunction of 
temporoparietal and frontocerebellar attention networks during more cognitive 
forms of inhibition.

DOI: 10.1192/bjp.bp.107.036558
PMID: 18174505 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


242. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 2004 Nov;43(11):1430-40. doi: 
10.1097/01.chi.0000140452.51205.8d.

Event-related FMRI evidence of frontotemporal involvement in aberrant response 
inhibition and task switching in attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.

Tamm L(1), Menon V, Ringel J, Reiss AL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Stanford University School of Medicine, CA, USA. 
ltamm@uci.edu

OBJECTIVE: Response inhibition deficits are characteristic of individuals with 
attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). Previous functional magnetic 
resonance imaging (fMRI) studies investigating the neural correlates of this 
dysfunction have used block designs, making it difficult to disentangle 
activation differences specifically related to response inhibition from 
activation differences related to subprocesses involved in task performance. The 
current study was designed to further enhance our understanding of this critical 
function in individuals with ADHD using event-related fMRI.
METHOD: Ten adolescent boys diagnosed with ADHD, combined type, and 12 typically 
developing controls completed a Go/NoGo task modified to control for novelty 
processing.
RESULTS: The ADHD group made significantly more errors of omission and more 
errors of commission than the control group. Further, compared with controls, 
individuals with ADHD showed marked abnormalities in brain activation during 
response inhibition, including hypoactivation of the anterior/mid-cingulate 
cortex extending to the supplementary motor area and hyperactivation of the left 
temporal gyrus.
CONCLUSIONS: The authors suggest that underactivation in frontal regions 
reflects core deficits in response/task-switching abilities for the ADHD group.

DOI: 10.1097/01.chi.0000140452.51205.8d
PMID: 15502603 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


243. Neuroimage. 2011 Jan 1;54(1):528-40. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2010.08.027. Epub 
2010 Aug 20.

Functional heterogeneity of conflict, error, task-switching, and unexpectedness 
effects within medial prefrontal cortex.

Nee DE(1), Kastner S, Brown JW.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychological & Brain Sciences, Indiana University, 
Bloomington, IN 47405, USA. denee@indiana.edu

The last decade has seen considerable discussion regarding a theoretical account 
of medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC) function with particular focus on the 
anterior cingulate cortex. The proposed theories have included conflict 
detection, error likelihood prediction, volatility monitoring, and several 
distinct theories of error detection. Arguments for and against particular 
theories often treat mPFC as functionally homogeneous, or at least nearly so, 
despite some evidence for distinct functional subregions. Here we used 
functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) to simultaneously contrast multiple 
effects of error, conflict, and task-switching that have been individually 
construed in support of various theories. We found overlapping yet functionally 
distinct subregions of mPFC, with activations related to dominant error, 
conflict, and task-switching effects successively found along a rostral-ventral 
to caudal-dorsal gradient within medial prefrontal cortex. Activations in the 
rostral cingulate zone (RCZ) were strongly correlated with the unexpectedness of 
outcomes suggesting a role in outcome prediction and preparing control systems 
to deal with anticipated outcomes. The results as a whole support a resolution 
of some ongoing debates in that distinct theories may each pertain to 
corresponding distinct yet overlapping subregions of mPFC.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2010.08.027
PMCID: PMC2962721
PMID: 20728547 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


244. Brain. 2002 Mar;125(Pt 3):624-39. doi: 10.1093/brain/awf049.

Decision-making processes following damage to the prefrontal cortex.

Manes F(1), Sahakian B, Clark L, Rogers R, Antoun N, Aitken M, Robbins T.

Author information:
(1)University of Cambridge Psychiatry Department, Addenbrooke's Hospital, 
Cambridge, UK.

Recent work has suggested an association between the orbitofrontal cortex in 
humans and practical decision making. The aim of this study was to investigate 
the profile of cognitive deficits, with particular emphasis on decision-making 
processes, following damage to different sectors of the human prefrontal cortex. 
Patients with discrete orbitofrontal (OBF) lesions, dorsolateral (DL) lesions, 
dorsomedial (DM) lesions and large frontal lesions (Large) were compared with 
matched controls on three different decision-making tasks: the Iowa Gambling 
Task and two recently developed tasks that attempt to fractionate some of the 
cognitive components of the Iowa task. A comprehensive battery including the 
assessment of recognition memory, working memory, planning ability and 
attentional set-shifting was also administered. Whilst combined frontal patients 
were impaired on several of the tasks employed, distinct profiles emerged for 
each patient group. In contrast to previous data, patients with focal OBF 
lesions performed at control levels on the three decision-making tasks (and the 
executive tasks), but showed some evidence of prolonged deliberation. DL 
patients showed pronounced impairment on working memory, planning, attentional 
shifting and the Iowa Gambling Task. DM patients were impaired at the Iowa 
Gambling Task and also at planning. The Large group displayed diffuse 
impairment, but were the only group to exhibit risky decision making. 
Methodological differences from previous studies of OBF patient groups are 
discussed, with particular attention to lesion laterality, lesion size and 
psychiatric presentation. Ventral and dorsal aspects of prefrontal cortex must 
interact in the maintenance of rational and 'non-risky' decision making.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/awf049
PMID: 11872618 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


245. Hum Brain Mapp. 2014 Feb;35(2):712-22. doi: 10.1002/hbm.22187. Epub 2012 Dec 20.

Acute tryptophan depletion promotes an anterior-to-posterior fMRI activation 
shift during task switching in older adults.

Lamar M(1), Craig M, Daly EM, Cutter WJ, Tang C, Brammer M, Rubia K, Murphy DG.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Institute of Psychiatry, King's College London, 
Guy's Campus, London United Kingdom; Section of Brain Maturation, Department of 
Forensic and Neurodevelopmental Science, Institute of Psychiatry, King's College 
London, De Crespigny Park, London, United Kingdom; Department of Psychiatry, 
University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, Illinois.

Studies have long reported that aging is associated with declines in several 
functions modulated by the prefrontal cortex, including executive functions like 
working memory, set shifting, and inhibitory control. The neurochemical basis to 
this is poorly understood, but may include the serotonergic system. We 
investigated the modulatory effect of serotonin using acute tryptophan depletion 
(ATD) during a cognitive switching task involving visual-spatial set shifting 
modified for a functional MRI environment. Ten healthy women over 55 years were 
tested on two separate occasions in this within-group double-blind 
sham-controlled crossover study to compare behavioral and physiological brain 
functioning following ATD and following a ("placebo") sham depletion condition. 
ATD did not significantly affect task performance. It did modulate brain 
functional recruitment. During sham depletion women significantly activated the 
expected task-relevant brain regions associated with the Switch task including 
prefrontal and anterior cingulate cortices. In contrast, following ATD 
participants activated posterior regions of brain more during switch than repeat 
trials. In addition to the main effects of depletion condition, a comparison of 
the ATD relative to the sham condition confirmed this anterior-to-posterior 
shift in activation. The posterior (increased) activation clusters significantly 
and negatively correlated with the reduced prefrontal activation clusters 
suggesting a compensation mechanism for reduced prefrontal activation during 
ATD. Thus, serotonin modulates an anterior-to-posterior shift of activation 
during cognitive switching in older adults. Neural adaptation to serotonin 
challenge during cognitive control may prove useful in determining cognitive 
vulnerability in older adults with a predisposition for serontonergic 
down-regulation (e.g., in vascular or late life depression).

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/hbm.22187
PMCID: PMC6868962
PMID: 23281064 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


246. Neuroimage. 2009 Apr 1;45(2):606-13. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2008.11.031. Epub 
2008 Dec 9.

Decoding sequential stages of task preparation in the human brain.

Bode S(1), Haynes JD.

Author information:
(1)Max Planck Institute for Human Cognitive and Brain Sciences, Leipzig, 
Germany.

The flow of information from sensory stimuli to motor responses in the human 
brain can be flexibly re-routed depending on task demands. However, it has 
remained unclear which sequence of processes is involved in preparing the brain 
for an upcoming task. Here, we used a combination of fMRI and multivariate 
pattern classification to decompose the information flow in a task-switching 
experiment. Specifically, we present a time-resolved decoding approach that 
allowed us to track the temporal buildup of task-related information. This 
approach also allowed us to distinguish encoding of the task from encoding of 
target stimuli and motor responses, thus separating between different components 
of information processing. We were able to decode from parietal and lateral 
prefrontal cortex which specific task-set a subject was currently holding. 
Importantly, this revealed that the intraparietal sulcus encoded task-set 
information before prefrontal cortex, and it was the only region to encode the 
specific task-set before the relevant target stimulus was presented. This 
suggests that task-related information in parietal cortex does not rely on input 
from prefrontal cortex as previously suggested. In contrast, our findings 
suggest that parietal cortex might play a role in establishing task-sets in 
prefrontal cortex.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2008.11.031
PMID: 19111624 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


247. J Neurosci. 2013 Jan 9;33(2):387-96. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3837-12.2013.

Lifelong bilingualism maintains neural efficiency for cognitive control in 
aging.

Gold BT(1), Kim C, Johnson NF, Kryscio RJ, Smith CD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology, University of Kentucky, Lexington, 
Kentucky 40536, USA. brian.gold@uky.edu

Recent behavioral data have shown that lifelong bilingualism can maintain 
youthful cognitive control abilities in aging. Here, we provide the first direct 
evidence of a neural basis for the bilingual cognitive control boost in aging. 
Two experiments were conducted, using a perceptual task-switching paradigm, 
including a total of 110 participants. In Experiment 1, older adult bilinguals 
showed better perceptual switching performance than their monolingual peers. In 
Experiment 2, younger and older adult monolinguals and bilinguals completed the 
same perceptual task-switching experiment while functional magnetic resonance 
imaging (fMRI) was performed. Typical age-related performance reductions and 
fMRI activation increases were observed. However, like younger adults, bilingual 
older adults outperformed their monolingual peers while displaying decreased 
activation in left lateral frontal cortex and cingulate cortex. Critically, this 
attenuation of age-related over-recruitment associated with bilingualism was 
directly correlated with better task-switching performance. In addition, the 
lower blood oxygenation level-dependent response in frontal regions accounted 
for 82% of the variance in the bilingual task-switching reaction time advantage. 
These results suggest that lifelong bilingualism offsets age-related declines in 
the neural efficiency for cognitive control processes.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3837-12.2013
PMCID: PMC3710134
PMID: 23303919 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


248. Neurobiol Aging. 2025 Jan;145:76-83. doi: 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2024.10.008. 
Epub 2024 Oct 31.

A neural implementation of cognitive reserve: Insights from a longitudinal fMRI 
study of set-switching in aging.

Hasanzadeh F(1), Habeck C(2), Gazes Y(3), Stern Y(4).

Author information:
(1)Cognitive Neuroscience Division, Department of Neurology, Columbia 
University, New York, NY, United States; Gertrude H. Sergievsky Center, Columbia 
University, New York, NY, United States.
(2)Cognitive Neuroscience Division, Department of Neurology, Columbia 
University, New York, NY, United States; Gertrude H. Sergievsky Center, Columbia 
University, New York, NY, United States; Taub Institute for Research in 
Alzheimer's Disease and the Aging Brain, Columbia University, New 
York, NY, United States.
(3)Cognitive Neuroscience Division, Department of Neurology, Columbia 
University, New York, NY, United States; Gertrude H. Sergievsky Center, Columbia 
University, New York, NY, United States; Taub Institute for Research in 
Alzheimer's Disease and the Aging Brain, Columbia University, New 
York, NY, United States; Montclair State University, Department of 
Psychology, Montclair, NJ, United States.
(4)Cognitive Neuroscience Division, Department of Neurology, Columbia 
University, New York, NY, United States; Gertrude H. Sergievsky Center, Columbia 
University, New York, NY, United States; Taub Institute for Research in 
Alzheimer's Disease and the Aging Brain, Columbia University, New 
York, NY, United States. Electronic address: ys11@cumc.columbia.edu.

Aging is often accompanied by changes in brain structure and executive 
functions, particularly in tasks involving cognitive flexibility, such as 
task-switching. However, substantial individual differences in the degree of 
cognitive impairment indicate that some individuals can cope with brain changes 
more effectively than others, suggesting higher cognitive reserve (CR). This 
study identified a neural basis for CR by examining the longitudinal 
relationship between task-related brain activation, structural brain changes, 
and changes in cognitive performance during an executive task-switching paradigm 
including single and dual conditions. Fifty-two older individuals were assessed 
at baseline and followed up after five years. Structural brain changes related 
to task-switching performance were analyzed using elastic net regression. 
Task-related functional brain activation was measured using ordinal trends 
canonical variate analysis (OrT CVA), capturing patterns of activation 
increasing from single to dual conditions. A differential task-related 
expression score (dOrT) was calculated as the difference in pattern expression 
scores between single and dual conditions at baseline. A linear regression model 
tested whether dOrT moderated the impact of brain changes on changes in switch 
cost over five years. Results showed a significant interaction between changes 
in brain structure and dOrT activation on switch cost change, indicating a 
moderation effect of task-related activation. Higher dOrT buffered the impact of 
brain structural decline on switch costs, enabling older adults to better cope 
with age-related brain structural changes and preserve cognitive flexibility. 
These findings suggest that these task-related activation patterns represent a 
neural basis for CR.

Copyright © 2024 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2024.10.008
PMCID: PMC11578778
PMID: 39509918 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest None.


249. J Cogn Neurosci. 2003 Aug 15;15(6):785-99. doi: 10.1162/089892903322370717.

Cognitive control mechanisms revealed by ERP and fMRI: evidence from repeated 
task-switching.

Swainson R(1), Cunnington R, Jackson GM, Rorden C, Peters AM, Morris PG, Jackson 
SR.

Author information:
(1)School of Psychology, University of Nottingham, UK. 
rachel.swainson@nottingham.ac.uk

We investigated the extent to which a common neural mechanism is involved in 
task set-switching and response withholding, factors that are frequently 
confounded in task-switching and go/no-go paradigms. Subjects' brain activity 
was measured using event-related electrical potentials (ERPs) and event-related 
functional MRI (fMRI) neuroimaging in separate studies using the same cognitive 
paradigm. Subjects made compatible left/right keypress responses to left/right 
arrow stimuli of 1000 msec duration; they switched every two trials between 
responding at stimulus onset (GO task-green arrows) and stimulus offset (WAIT 
task-red arrows). With-holding an immediate response (WAIT vs. GO) elicited an 
enhancement of the frontal N2 ERP and lateral PFC activation of the right 
hemisphere, both previously associated with the "no-go" response, but only on 
switch trials. Task-switching (switch vs. nonswitch) was associated with frontal 
N2 amplification and right hemisphere ventrolateral PFC activation, but only for 
the WAIT task. The anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) was the only brain region to 
be activated for both types of task switch, but this activation was located more 
rostrally for the WAIT than for the GO switch trials. We conclude that the 
frontal N2 ERP and lateral PFC activation are not markers for withholding an 
immediate response or switching tasks per se, but are associated with switching 
into a response-suppression mode. Different regions within the ACC may be 
involved in two processes integral to task-switching: processing response 
conflict (rostral ACC) and overcoming prior response suppression (caudal ACC).

DOI: 10.1162/089892903322370717
PMID: 14511532 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


250. Neuroimage. 2006 Jun;31(2):887-95. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2005.12.043. Epub 
2006 Feb 20.

Neural mechanisms of advance preparation in task switching.

Gruber O(1), Karch S, Schlueter EK, Falkai P, Goschke T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Saarland University Hospital, Homburg (Saar), 
Germany. oliver.gruber@uniklinikum-saarland.de

The preparation effect in task switching can be interpreted to reflect cognitive 
control processes during the interval between task-cue onset and the 
trial-stimulus onset which support the flexible and rapid configuration of 
response dispositions. However, it is an open issue what neural processes 
underlie this effect. In the present study, healthy volunteers underwent 
functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) while performing a cued task 
switching paradigm, in which geometric objects had to be classified according to 
either color or shape. By manipulating the duration of the cue-target-interval 
(CTI) in the range between 0 and 1500 ms, we were able to dissociate brain 
activity changes related to the processing of either the cue or the target. A 
network of frontal and parietal brain areas was activated during advance 
preparation for the upcoming task independent of whether the task was switched 
or repeated. The same brain regions also showed increased neural activity in 
response to targets without advance preparation in contrast to targets with 
advance preparation which only elicited activations in areas involved in visual 
processing and motor execution. These findings strongly argue for a 'task-set 
activation perspective' on advance preparation in task switching [Altmann, E.M., 
2004. Advance preparation in task switching: what work is being done? Psychol. 
Sci. 15, 616-622.], whereas no empirical support could be found for the 'mental 
gear changing model' of task switching as no significant brain activity changes 
were observable in association with task switches, switch costs, or the 
interaction effect of advance preparation on switch costs. Finally, in the light 
of previous behavioral studies on interference effects of articulatory 
suppression on task preparation in humans, the present findings are compatible 
with the assumption that verbalization mechanisms, e.g., the retrieval of a 
verbal task or goal representation into working memory may be a functional 
component of advance configuration of task-sets.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2005.12.043
PMID: 16490365 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


251. J Neurophysiol. 2002 May;87(5):2577-92. doi: 10.1152/jn.2002.87.5.2577.

Role of the human medial frontal cortex in task switching: a combined fMRI and 
TMS study.

Rushworth MF(1), Hadland KA, Paus T, Sipila PK.

Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental Psychology, University of Oxford, Oxford OX1 3UD, 
United Kingdom.

We used event-related functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) to measure 
brain activity when subjects were performing identical tasks in the context of 
either a task-set switch or a continuation of earlier performance. The context, 
i.e., switching or staying with the current task, influenced medial frontal 
cortical activation; the medial frontal cortex is transiently activated at the 
time that subjects switch from one way of performing a task to another. Two 
types of task-set-switching paradigms were investigated. In the 
response-switching (RS) paradigm, subjects switched between different rules for 
response selection and had to choose between competing responses. In the 
visual-switching (VS) paradigm, subjects switched between different rules for 
stimulus selection and had to choose between competing visual stimuli. The type 
of conflict, sensory (VS) or motor (RS), involved in switching was critical in 
determining medial frontal activation. Switching in the RS paradigm was 
associated with clear blood-oxygenation-level-dependent signal increases 
("activations") in three medial frontal areas: the rostral cingulate zone, the 
caudal cingulate zone, and the presupplementary motor area (pre-SMA). Switching 
in the VS task was associated with definite activation in just one medial 
frontal area, a region on the border between the pre-SMA and the SMA. Subsequent 
to the fMRI session, we used MRI-guided frameless stereotaxic procedures and 
repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS) to test the importance of 
the medial frontal activations for task switching. Applying rTMS over the 
pre-SMA disrupted subsequent RS performance but only when it was applied in the 
context of a switch. This result shows, first, that the pre-SMA is essential for 
task switching and second that its essential role is transient and limited to 
just the time of behavioral switching. The results are consistent with a role 
for the pre-SMA in selecting between response sets at a superordinate level 
rather than in selecting individual responses. The effect of the rTMS was not 
simply due to the tactile and auditory artifacts associated with each pulse; 
rTMS over several control regions did not selectively disrupt switching. 
Applying rTMS over the SMA/pre-SMA area activated in the VS paradigm did not 
disrupt switching. This result, first, confirms the limited importance of the 
medial frontal cortex for sensory attentional switching. Second, the VS rTMS 
results suggest that just because an area is activated in two paradigms does not 
mean that it plays the same essential role in both cases.

DOI: 10.1152/jn.2002.87.5.2577
PMID: 11976394 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


252. J Cogn Neurosci. 2021 Jun 1;33(7):1365-1380. doi: 10.1162/jocn_a_01720.

Probing the Neural Systems Underlying Flexible Dimensional Attention.

Buss AT(1), Magnotta V(2), Hazeltine E(2), Kinder K(1), Spencer JP(3).

Author information:
(1)University of Tennessee, Knoxville.
(2)University of Iowa.
(3)University of East Anglia, United Kingdom.

Flexibly shifting attention between stimulus dimensions (e.g., shape and color) 
is a central component of regulating cognition for goal-based behavior. In the 
present report, we examine the functional roles of different cortical regions by 
manipulating two demands on task switching that have been confounded in previous 
studies-shifting attention between visual dimensions and resolving conflict 
between stimulus-response representations. Dimensional shifting was manipulated 
by having participants shift attention between dimensions (either shape or 
color; dimension shift) or keeping the task-relevant dimension the same 
(dimension same). Conflict between stimulus-response representations was 
manipulated by creating conflict between response-driven associations from the 
previous set of trials and the stimulus-response mappings on the current set of 
trials (e.g., making a leftward response to a red stimulus during the previous 
task, but being required to make a rightward response to a red stimulus in the 
current task; stimulus-response conflict), or eliminating conflict by altering 
the features of the dimension relevant to the sorting rule (stimulus-response 
no-conflict). These manipulations revealed activation along a network of 
frontal, temporal, parietal, and occipital cortices. Specifically, dimensional 
shifting selectively activated frontal and parietal regions. Stimulus-response 
conflict, on the other hand, produced decreased activation in temporal and 
occipital cortices. Occipital regions demonstrated a complex pattern of 
activation that was sensitive to both stimulus-response conflict and dimensional 
attention switching. These results provide novel information regarding the 
distinct role that frontal cortex plays in shifting dimensional attention and 
posterior cortices play in resolving conflict at the stimulus level.

© 2021 Massachusetts Institute of Technology.

DOI: 10.1162/jocn_a_01720
PMID: 34496401 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


253. Brain Res. 2006 Dec 13;1125(1):94-103. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2006.09.092. Epub 
2006 Nov 7.

Dissociating neural indices of dynamic cognitive control in advance task-set 
preparation: an ERP study of task switching.

Astle DE(1), Jackson GM, Swainson R.

Author information:
(1)School of Psychology, University of Nottingham, University Park, Nottingham, 
NG7 2RD, UK. lpxda@psychology.nottingham.ac.uk

Switching between different tasks is associated with performance deficits, or 
'switch costs', relative to repeating the same task. Recent evidence suggests 
that response rather than task selection processes may be a major cause of 
switch costs [Schuch, S., Koch, I., 2003. The role of response selection for 
inhibition of task sets in task shifting. J Exp Psychol Hum Percept Perform, 29 
(1) 92-105]. Thus, switch costs are not incurred if on the preceding trial a 
task has been prepared for but no response required (a 'no-go' trial). We 
investigated the relationship between response selection and the subsequent 
preparation of an alternative task set. While switch costs were absent following 
'no-go' trials, ERP differences during the precueing interval showed that 
response selection has implications for subsequent task preparation as well as 
for task performance per se. The results are discussed in relation to the 
dissociation of intention versus action in behavioural control and the role of 
inhibition in switching between task sets.

DOI: 10.1016/j.brainres.2006.09.092
PMID: 17087918 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


254. Neuroimage. 2015 Mar;108:354-63. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2014.12.028. Epub 
2014 Dec 18.

Theta frontoparietal connectivity associated with proactive and reactive 
cognitive control processes.

Cooper PS(1), Wong AS(2), Fulham WR(1), Thienel R(1), Mansfield E(1), Michie 
PT(1), Karayanidis F(3).

Author information:
(1)Functional Neuroimaging Laboratory, School of Psychology, University of 
Newcastle, Australia; Priority Research Centre for Translational Neuroscience 
and Mental Health, University of Newcastle, Australia; Hunter Medical Research 
Institute, University of Newcastle, Australia.
(2)Functional Neuroimaging Laboratory, School of Psychology, University of 
Newcastle, Australia; Priority Research Centre for Translational Neuroscience 
and Mental Health, University of Newcastle, Australia; School of Electrical 
Engineering and Computer Science, University of Newcastle, Australia.
(3)Functional Neuroimaging Laboratory, School of Psychology, University of 
Newcastle, Australia; Priority Research Centre for Translational Neuroscience 
and Mental Health, University of Newcastle, Australia; Hunter Medical Research 
Institute, University of Newcastle, Australia. Electronic address: 
Frini.Karayanidis@newcastle.edu.au.

Cognitive control involves both proactive and reactive processes. Paradigms that 
rely on reactive control have shown that frontoparietal oscillatory 
synchronization in the theta frequency band is associated with interference 
control. This study examines whether proactive control is also associated with 
connectivity in the same frontoparietal theta network or involves a distinct 
neural signature. A task-switching paradigm was used to differentiate between 
proactive and reactive control processes, involved in preparing to switch or 
repeat a task and resolving post-target interference, respectively. We confirm 
that reactive control is associated with frontoparietal theta connectivity. 
Importantly, we show that proactive control is also associated with theta band 
oscillatory synchronization but in a different frontoparietal network. These 
findings support the existence of distinct proactive and reactive cognitive 
control processes that activate different theta frontoparietal oscillatory 
networks.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2014.12.028
PMID: 25528657 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


255. Front Cell Neurosci. 2018 Oct 1;12:331. doi: 10.3389/fncel.2018.00331. 
eCollection 2018.

Prominent Changes in Cerebro-Cerebellar Functional Connectivity During 
Continuous Cognitive Processing.

Castellazzi G(1)(2)(3), Bruno SD(4), Toosy AT(5), Casiraghi L(3)(6), Palesi 
F(7), Savini G(3)(8), D'Angelo E(3)(6), Wheeler-Kingshott CAMG(1)(6)(9).

Author information:
(1)NMR Research Unit, Department of Neuroinflammation, Queen Square MS Centre, 
Institute of Neurology, University College London, London, United Kingdom.
(2)Department of Electrical, Computer and Biomedical Engineering, University of 
Pavia, Pavia, Italy.
(3)Brain Connectivity Center, IRCCS Mondino Foundation, Pavia, Italy.
(4)Blackheath Brain Injury Rehabilitation Centre, London, United Kingdom.
(5)NMR Research Unit, Department of Brain Repair and Rehabilitation, Queen 
Square MS Centre, Institute of Neurology, University College London, London, 
United Kingdom.
(6)Department of Brain and Behavioral Sciences, University of Pavia, Pavia, 
Italy.
(7)Brain MRI 3T Center, Neuroradiology Unit, IRCCS Mondino Foundation, Pavia, 
Italy.
(8)Department of Physics, University of Milan, Milan, Italy.
(9)Brain MRI 3T Center, IRCCS Mondino Foundation, Pavia, Italy.

While task-dependent responses of specific brain areas during cognitive tasks 
are well established, much less is known about the changes occurring in resting 
state networks (RSNs) in relation to continuous cognitive processing. In 
particular, the functional involvement of cerebro-cerebellar loops connecting 
the posterior cerebellum to associative cortices, remains unclear. In this 
study, 22 healthy volunteers underwent a multi-session functional magnetic 
resonance imaging (fMRI) protocol composed of four consecutive 8-min resting 
state fMRI (rs-fMRI) scans. After a first control scan, participants listened to 
a narrated story for the entire duration of the second rs-fMRI scan; two further 
rs-fMRI scans followed the end of story listening. The story plot was purposely 
designed to stimulate specific cognitive processes that are known to involve the 
cerebro-cerebellar loops. Almost all of the identified 15 RSNs showed changes in 
functional connectivity (FC) during and for several minutes after the story. The 
FC changes mainly occurred in the frontal and prefrontal cortices and in the 
posterior cerebellum, especially in Crus I-II and lobule VI. The FC changes 
occurred in cerebellar clusters belonging to different RSNs, including the 
cerebellar network (CBLN), sensory networks (lateral visual network, LVN; medial 
visual network, MVN) and cognitive networks (default mode network, DMN; 
executive control network, ECN; right and left ventral attention networks, RVAN 
and LVAN; salience network, SN; language network, LN; and working memory 
network, WMN). Interestingly, a k-means analysis of FC changes revealed 
clustering of FCN, ECN, and WMN, which are all involved in working memory 
functions, CBLN, DMN, and SN, which play a key-role in attention switching, and 
RSNs involved in visual imagery. These results show that the cerebellum is 
deeply entrained in well-structured network clusters, which reflect multiple 
aspects of cognitive processing, during and beyond the conclusion of auditory 
stimulation.

DOI: 10.3389/fncel.2018.00331
PMCID: PMC6174227
PMID: 30327590


256. Neurosci Lett. 2001 Nov 16;314(3):147-50. doi: 10.1016/s0304-3940(01)02308-4.

Brain activity index of distractibility in normal school-age children.

Gumenyuk V(1), Korzyukov O, Alho K, Escera C, Schröger E, Ilmoniemi RJ, Näätänen 
R.

Author information:
(1)Cognitive Brain Research Unit, Department of Psychology, P.O. Box 13, 
FIN-00014, University of Helsinki, Finland. valentina.gumenyuk@helsinki.fi

Children's attention is easily diverted from a current activity to a new event 
in the environment. This was indexed in school-age children by diminished 
performance speed and accuracy in a visual discrimination task caused by 
task-irrelevant novel sounds. Event-related brain potentials (ERPs) elicited by 
these distracting sounds showed a prominent positive deflection that was 
generated by brain processes associated with involuntary switching of attention 
to novel sounds. Recordings of the magnetoencephalographic (MEG) counterpart of 
this brain activity revealed a major bilateral generator source in the superior 
temporal cortex. However, ERP scalp distributions indicated also overlapping 
brain activity generated in other brain areas involved in involuntary attention 
switching. Moreover, differences in ERP amplitudes and in their correlations 
with the reaction times between younger (7-10 years) and older (11-13 years) 
children indicated developmental changes in attentional brain functions.

DOI: 10.1016/s0304-3940(01)02308-4
PMID: 11704305 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


257. Neuroreport. 2001 Jul 3;12(9):2065-71. doi: 10.1097/00001756-200107030-00054.

General and task-specific frontal lobe recruitment in older adults during 
executive processes: a fMRI investigation of task-switching.

DiGirolamo GJ(1), Kramer AF, Barad V, Cepeda NJ, Weissman DH, Milham MP, Wszalek 
TM, Cohen NJ, Banich MT, Webb A, Belopolsky AV, McAuley E.

Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental Psychology, University of Cambridge, Downing Site, 
Cambridge CB3 2EB, UK.

Performance deteriorates when subjects must shift between two different tasks 
relative to performing either task separately. This switching cost is thought to 
result from executive processes that are not inherent to the component 
operations of either task when performed alone. Medial and dorsolateral frontal 
cortices are theorized to subserve these executive processes. Here we show that 
larger areas of activation were seen in dorsolateral and medial frontal cortex 
in both younger and older adults during switching than repeating conditions, 
confirming the role of these frontal brain regions in executive processes. 
Younger subjects activated these medial and dorsolateral frontal cortices only 
when switching between tasks; in contrast, older subjects recruited similar 
frontal regions while performing the tasks in isolation as well as alternating 
between them. Older adults recruit medial and dorsolateral frontal areas, and 
the processes computed by these areas, even when no such demands are intrinsic 
to the current task conditions. This neural recruitment may be useful in 
offsetting the declines in cognitive function associated with ageing.

DOI: 10.1097/00001756-200107030-00054
PMID: 11435947 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


258. Cogn Affect Behav Neurosci. 2019 Jun;19(3):568-585. doi: 
10.3758/s13415-019-00689-0.

Striatal-frontal network activation during voluntary task selection under 
conditions of monetary reward.

Orr JM(1)(2), Imburgio MJ(3), Bernard JA(3)(4), Banich MT(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, Texas A&M University, 515 
Coke Street, College Station, TX, 77843-4235, USA. joseph.orr@tamu.edu.
(2)Texas A&M Institute for Neuroscience, Texas A&M University, College Station, 
TX, USA. joseph.orr@tamu.edu.
(3)Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, Texas A&M University, 515 
Coke Street, College Station, TX, 77843-4235, USA.
(4)Texas A&M Institute for Neuroscience, Texas A&M University, College Station, 
TX, USA.
(5)Institute of Cognitive Science, University of Colorado Boulder, Boulder, CO, 
USA.
(6)Department of Psychology and Neuroscience, University of Colorado Boulder, 
Boulder, CO, USA.

Erratum in
    Cogn Affect Behav Neurosci. 2019 Oct;19(5):1318. doi: 
10.3758/s13415-019-00708-0.

During voluntary task selection, a number of internal and external biases may 
guide such a choice. However, it is not well understood how reward influences 
task selection when multiple options are possible. To address this issue, we 
examined brain activation in a voluntary task-switching paradigm while 
participants underwent fMRI (n = 19). To reinforce the overall goal to choose 
the tasks randomly, participants were told of a large bonus that they would 
receive at the end of the experiment for making random task choices. We also 
examined how occasional, random rewards influenced both task performance and 
brain activation. We hypothesized that these transient rewards would increase 
the value of the just-performed task, and therefore bias participants to choose 
to repeat the same task on the subsequent trial. Contrary to expectations, 
transient reward had no consistent behavioral effect on subsequent task choice. 
Nevertheless, the receipt of such rewards did influence activation in brain 
regions associated with reward processing as well as those associated with 
goal-directed control. In addition, reward on a prior trial was found to 
influence activation during task choice on a subsequent trial, with greater 
activation in a number of executive function regions compared with no-reward 
trials. We posit that both the random presentation of transient rewards and the 
overall task bonus for random task choices together reinforced the goal to 
choose the tasks randomly, which in turn influenced activation in both 
reward-related regions and those regions involved in abstract goal processing.

DOI: 10.3758/s13415-019-00689-0
PMCID: PMC6599477
PMID: 30697672 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Although co-author Marie T. Banich is the 
Editor-in-Chief of Cognitive, Affective, and Behavioral Neuroscience, Stan 
Floresco served as the action editor for this manuscript.


259. Brain Cogn. 2019 Apr;131:34-44. doi: 10.1016/j.bandc.2017.08.006. Epub 2017 Aug 
23.

Using resting-state fMRI to assess the effect of aerobic exercise on functional 
connectivity of the DLPFC in older overweight adults.

Prehn K(1), Lesemann A(2), Krey G(2), Witte AV(3), Köbe T(2), Grittner U(4), 
Flöel A(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology & NeuroCure Clinical Research Center, Charité - 
Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany. Electronic address: 
kristin.prehn@charite.de.
(2)Department of Neurology & NeuroCure Clinical Research Center, Charité - 
Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany.
(3)Department of Neurology & NeuroCure Clinical Research Center, Charité - 
Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany; Department of Neurology, Aging and 
Obesity Group, Max Planck Institute for Human Cognitive and Brain Sciences, 
Leipzig, Germany.
(4)Department of Biostatistics and Clinical Epidemiology, Charité - 
Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany; Center for Stroke Research, Charité 
- Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany.
(5)Department of Neurology & NeuroCure Clinical Research Center, Charité - 
Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany; Center for Stroke Research, Charité 
- Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany; Department of Neurology, 
University of Greifswald, Greifswald, Germany. Electronic address: 
agnes.floeel@uni-greifswald.de.

Cardiovascular fitness is thought to exert beneficial effects on brain function 
and might delay the onset of cognitive decline. Empirical evidence of 
exercise-induced cognitive enhancement, however, has not been conclusive, 
possibly due to short intervention times in clinical trials. Resting-state 
functional connectivity (RSFC) has been proposed asan early indicator for 
intervention-induced changes. Here, we conducted a study in which healthy older 
overweight subjects took either part in a moderate aerobic exercise program over 
6months (AE group; n=11) or control condition of non-aerobic stretching and 
toning (NAE group; n=18). While cognitive and gray matter volume changes were 
rather small (i.e., appeared only in certain sub-scores without Bonferroni 
correction for multiple comparisons or using small volume correction), we found 
significantly increased RSFC after training between dorsolateral prefrontal 
cortex and superior parietal gyrus/precuneus in the AE compared to the NAE 
group. This intervention study demonstrates an exercise-induced modulation of 
RSFC between key structures of the executive control and default mode networks, 
which might mediate an interaction between task-positive and task-negative brain 
activation required for task switching. Results further emphasize the value of 
RSFC asa sensitive biomarker for detecting early intervention-related cognitive 
improvements in clinical trials.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bandc.2017.08.006
PMID: 28844505 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


260. Neuroreport. 2009 May 27;20(8):820-4. doi: 10.1097/WNR.0b013e32832bfc94.

Error positivity is related to attentional control of task switching.

Tanaka H(1).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Psychology, Department of Psychology, Otemon Gakuin University, 
Osaka, Japan. tanahide@res.otemon.ac.jp

This study aimed to investigate the relationship between attentional control and 
action monitoring in a task-switching paradigm by examining the error-related 
negativity and positivity, components of event-related potentials that reflect 
action monitoring, including error detection. This study was designed with both 
a task-switching condition and a single-task condition and the results were 
compared between the two conditions. Error-related positivity amplitude 
decreased in the task-switching condition, whereas error-related negativity 
amplitude did not change in either condition. The results therefore support the 
notion that the two error-related components represent different aspects of 
action monitoring, including error detection.

DOI: 10.1097/WNR.0b013e32832bfc94
PMID: 19384255 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


261. Neuropsychologia. 2024 Aug 13;201:108936. doi: 
10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2024.108936. Epub 2024 Jun 6.

Native language advantage in electrical brain responses to speech sound changes 
in passive and active listening condition.

Yang T(1), Kurkela JLO(2), Chen K(3), Liu Y(4), Shu H(5), Cong F(6), Hämäläinen 
JA(7), Astikainen P(8).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Interdisciplinary Brain Research, Department of Psychology, 
University of Jyväskylä, Jyväskylä, Finland. Electronic address: 
tiantian.t.yang@jyu.fi.
(2)Centre for Interdisciplinary Brain Research, Department of Psychology, 
University of Jyväskylä, Jyväskylä, Finland. Electronic address: 
jari.kurkela@outlook.com.
(3)State Key Laboratory of Cognitive Neuroscience and Learning, Beijing Normal 
University, Beijing, China. Electronic address: psychckc@163.com.
(4)State Key Laboratory of Cognitive Neuroscience and Learning, Beijing Normal 
University, Beijing, China. Electronic address: youyiliu@bnu.edu.cn.
(5)State Key Laboratory of Cognitive Neuroscience and Learning, Beijing Normal 
University, Beijing, China. Electronic address: shuh@bnu.edu.cn.
(6)Department of Mathematical Information Technology, University of Jyväskylä, 
Jyväskylä, Finland; Department of Biomedical Engineering, Faculty of Electronic 
Information and Electrical Engineering, Dalian University of Technology, Dalian, 
China. Electronic address: cong@dlut.edu.cn.
(7)Centre for Interdisciplinary Brain Research, Department of Psychology, 
University of Jyväskylä, Jyväskylä, Finland. Electronic address: 
jarmo.a.hamalainen@jyu.fi.
(8)Centre for Interdisciplinary Brain Research, Department of Psychology, 
University of Jyväskylä, Jyväskylä, Finland. Electronic address: 
piia.astikainen@jyu.fi.

It is not clear whether the brain can detect changes in native and non-native 
speech sounds in both unattended and attended conditions, but this information 
would be important to understand the nature of potential native language 
advantage in speech perception. We recorded event-related potentials (ERPs) for 
changes in duration and in Chinese lexical tone in a repeated vowel /a/ in 
native speakers of Finnish and Chinese in passive and active listening 
conditions. ERP amplitudes reflecting deviance detection (mismatch negativity; 
MMN and N2b) and attentional shifts towards changes in speech sounds (P3a and 
P3b) were investigated. In the passive listening condition, duration changes 
elicited increased amplitude in the MMN latency window for both standard and 
deviant sounds in the Finnish speakers compared to the Chinese speakers, but no 
group differences were observed for P3a. In passive listening to lexical tones, 
P3a was increased in amplitude for both standard and deviant stimuli in Chinese 
speakers compared to Finnish speakers, but the groups did not differ in MMN. In 
active listening, both tone and duration changes elicited N2b and P3b, but the 
groups differed only in pattern of results for the deviant type. The results 
thus suggest an overall increased sensitivity to native speech sounds, 
especially in passive listening, while the mechanisms of change detection and 
attentional shifting seem to work well for both native and non-native speech 
sounds in the attentive mode.

Copyright © 2024. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2024.108936
PMID: 38851314 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


262. Cortex. 2014 Feb;51:67-81. doi: 10.1016/j.cortex.2013.10.009. Epub 2013 Nov 4.

Subcortical volume analysis in traumatic brain injury: the importance of the 
fronto-striato-thalamic circuit in task switching.

Leunissen I(1), Coxon JP(2), Caeyenberghs K(3), Michiels K(4), Sunaert S(5), 
Swinnen SP(6).

Author information:
(1)Movement Control and Neuroplasticity Research Group, Group Biomedical 
Sciences, KU Leuven, Belgium. Electronic address: 
inge.leunissen@faber.kuleuven.be.
(2)Movement Neuroscience Laboratory, University of Auckland, New Zealand.
(3)Movement Control and Neuroplasticity Research Group, Group Biomedical 
Sciences, KU Leuven, Belgium; Department of Physical Therapy and Motor 
Rehabilitation, Ghent University, Belgium.
(4)Department of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, University Hospital, 
Leuven Campus Pellenberg, Belgium.
(5)Medical Imaging Research Center, Group Biomedical Sciences, KU Leuven, 
Belgium.
(6)Movement Control and Neuroplasticity Research Group, Group Biomedical 
Sciences, KU Leuven, Belgium; Leuven Research Institute for Neuroscience & 
Disease (LIND), Belgium.

Traumatic brain injury (TBI) is associated with neuronal loss, diffuse axonal 
injury and executive dysfunction. Whereas executive dysfunction has 
traditionally been associated with prefrontal lesions, ample evidence suggests 
that those functions requiring behavioral flexibility critically depend on the 
interaction between frontal cortex, basal ganglia and thalamus. To test whether 
structural integrity of this fronto-striato-thalamic circuit can account for 
executive impairments in TBI we automatically segmented the thalamus, putamen 
and caudate of 25 patients and 21 healthy controls and obtained diffusion 
weighted images. We assessed components of executive function using the 
local-global task, which requires inhibition, updating and switching between 
actions. Shape analysis revealed localized atrophy of the limbic, executive and 
rostral-motor zones of the basal ganglia, whereas atrophy of the thalami was 
more global in TBI. This subcortical atrophy was related to white matter 
microstructural organization in TBI, suggesting that axonal injuries possibly 
contribute to subcortical volume loss. Global volume of the nuclei showed no 
clear relationship with task performance. However, the shape analysis revealed 
that participants with smaller volume of those subregions that have connections 
with the prefrontal cortex and rostral motor areas showed higher switch costs 
and mixing costs, and made more errors while switching. These results support 
the idea that flexible cognitive control over action depends on interactions 
within the fronto-striato-thalamic circuit.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cortex.2013.10.009
PMID: 24290948 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


263. Neuroimage. 2014 Sep;98:359-65. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2014.05.010. Epub 2014 
May 12.

Anticipatory processes in brain state switching - evidence from a novel 
cued-switching task implicating default mode and salience networks.

Sidlauskaite J(1), Wiersema JR(2), Roeyers H(2), Krebs RM(3), Vassena E(3), Fias 
W(4), Brass M(3), Achten E(5), Sonuga-Barke E(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental-Clinical and Health Psychology, Ghent University, 
Henri Dunantlaan 2, Ghent B-9000, Belgium. Electronic address: 
Justina.Sidlauskaite@UGent.be.
(2)Department of Experimental-Clinical and Health Psychology, Ghent University, 
Henri Dunantlaan 2, Ghent B-9000, Belgium.
(3)Department of Experimental Psychology, Ghent University, Henri Dunantlaan 2, 
Ghent B-9000, Belgium.
(4)Department of Experimental Psychology, Ghent University, Henri Dunantlaan 2, 
Ghent B-9000, Belgium; Ghent Institute for Functional and Metabolic Imaging, 
Ghent University Hospital, De Pintelaan 185, Ghent B-9000, Belgium.
(5)Ghent Institute for Functional and Metabolic Imaging, Ghent University 
Hospital, De Pintelaan 185, Ghent B-9000, Belgium.
(6)Department of Experimental-Clinical and Health Psychology, Ghent University, 
Henri Dunantlaan 2, Ghent B-9000, Belgium; Developmental Brain-Behaviour Unit, 
Psychology, University of Southampton, Shackleton Building (B44), Highfield 
Campus, Southampton SO17 1BJ, UK.

The default mode network (DMN) is the core brain system supporting internally 
oriented cognition. The ability to attenuate the DMN when switching to 
externally oriented processing is a prerequisite for effective performance and 
adaptive self-regulation. Right anterior insula (rAI), a core hub of the 
salience network (SN), has been proposed to control the switching from DMN to 
task-relevant brain networks. Little is currently known about the extent of 
anticipatory processes subserved by DMN and SN during switching. We investigated 
anticipatory DMN and SN modulation using a novel cued-switching task of 
between-state (rest-to-task/task-to-rest) and within-state (task-to-task) 
transitions. Twenty healthy adults performed the task implemented in an 
event-related functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) design. Increases in 
activity were observed in the DMN regions in response to cues signalling 
upcoming rest. DMN attenuation was observed for rest-to-task switch cues. 
Obversely, DMN was up-regulated by task-to-rest cues. The strongest rAI response 
was observed to rest-to-task switch cues. Task-to-task switch cues elicited 
smaller rAI activation, whereas no significant rAI activation occurred for 
task-to-rest switches. Our data provide the first evidence that DMN modulation 
occurs rapidly and can be elicited by short duration cues signalling rest- and 
task-related state switches. The role of rAI appears to be limited to certain 
switch types - those implicating transition from a resting state and to tasks 
involving active cognitive engagement.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2014.05.010
PMID: 24830839 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


264. Neuroimage. 2010 Aug 15;52(2):643-57. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2010.04.249. 
Epub 2010 Apr 29.

Adult age differences in functional connectivity during executive control.

Madden DJ(1), Costello MC, Dennis NA, Davis SW, Shepler AM, Spaniol J, Bucur B, 
Cabeza R.

Author information:
(1)Center for the Study of Aging and Human Development, Duke University Medical 
Center, Durham, NC 27710, USA. djm@geri.duke.edu

Task switching requires executive control processes that undergo age-related 
decline. Previous neuroimaging studies have identified age-related differences 
in brain activation associated with global switching effects (dual-task blocks 
versus single-task blocks), but age-related differences in activation during 
local switching effects (switch trials versus repeat trials, within blocks) have 
not been investigated. This experiment used functional magnetic resonance 
imaging (fMRI), and diffusion tensor imaging (DTI), to examine adult age 
differences in task switching across adjacent trials (i.e., local task 
switching). During fMRI scanning, participants performed a cued, word 
categorization task. From interspersed cue-only trials, switch-related 
processing associated with the cue was estimated separately from the target. 
Activation associated with task switching, within a distributed frontoparietal 
network, differed for cue- and target-related processing. The magnitude of 
event-related activation for task switching was similar for younger adults 
(n=20; 18-27years) and older adults (n=20; 60-85years), although activation 
sustained throughout the on-tasks periods exhibited some age-related decline. 
Critically, the functional connectivity of switch-related regions, during cue 
processing, was higher for younger adults than for older adults, whereas 
functional connectivity during target processing was comparable across the age 
groups. Further, individual differences in cue-related functional connectivity 
shared a substantial portion of the age-related variability in the efficiency of 
target categorization response (drift rate). This age-related difference in 
functional connectivity, however, was independent of white matter integrity 
within task-relevant regions. These findings highlight the functional 
connectivity of frontoparietal activation as a potential source of age-related 
decline in executive control.

Copyright (c) 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2010.04.249
PMCID: PMC2902259
PMID: 20434565 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


265. J Neurophysiol. 2025 May 1;133(5):1583-1593. doi: 10.1152/jn.00500.2024. Epub 
2025 Apr 18.

Brain-wide spatial mapping of oscillatory activity during naturalistic motor 
behavior.

Bönstrup M(1)(2)(3), Schneider T(2), Bräuer A(2), Ader J(2), Villringer A(3)(4), 
Classen J(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Goethe University Frankfurt, University Hospital, 
Frankfurt, Germany.
(2)Department of Neurology, Leipzig University Medical Center, Leipzig, Germany.
(3)Department of Neurology, Max Planck Institute for Human Cognitive and Brain 
Sciences, Leipzig, Germany.
(4)Day Clinic for Cognitive Neurology, Leipzig University Medical Center, 
Leipzig, Germany.

Understanding oscillatory neural activity associated with motor behavior is 
greatly contributing to the development of neuroprosthetic systems, robotic 
interfaces, and advanced neurorehabilitation techniques. Most current knowledge 
about movement-specific patterns of cortical activity is derived from laboratory 
experiments using highly standardized, repetitive, and often meaningless 
movements that are very distinct from natural motor behavior. This is 
characterized by frequent task switching, diverse kinematics, and endogenous 
motivation. Whether observed patterns of movement-related neural activity during 
standard laboratory tasks can be generalized to natural motor behavior is 
largely unknown. Here, we investigated the spatial, spectral, and temporal 
features of oscillatory neural activity associated with human motor control in a 
parkour of everyday movements. We replicated strong and significant decreases in 
the alpha/beta frequency range before movement onset and further show that this 
power decrease began about 2 s before movement initiation and reached a nadir 
around movement onset. In addition to the sustained event-related decrease in 
the alpha/beta range, we identified brief (4-5 cycles) increases in 
low-frequency activity (3-5 Hz) that either preceded or peaked at movement 
onset. These low-frequency increases exhibited much greater focality and 
lateralization compared with the wide-spread alpha/beta decrease. Together, our 
results provide a comprehensive account of brain rhythmic electric activity 
across spatial, spectral, and temporal scales in naturalistic motor behavior. 
Movement-preceding low-frequency activity has previously been identified as a 
promising brain stimulation target in patients with stroke. Detectability of 
low-frequency activity in naturalistic movements may enhance its utility as a 
target for on-demand brain stimulation in neurorehabilitation.NEW & NOTEWORTHY 
We here provide a comprehensive account of brain rhythmic electric activity 
across spatial, spectral, and temporal scales, associated with ecologically 
valid, freely chosen, auditory cued, and visually guided movements of either 
hand. New and noteworthy, the brain-wide topography of movement preceding, 
short-lasting increases in low-frequency activity (3-5 Hz), recently identified 
as a promising target for on-demand neurostimulation in stroke rehabilitation, 
is described and compared with classically studied sensorimotor rhythms.

DOI: 10.1152/jn.00500.2024
PMID: 40249924 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


266. Neuropsychology. 2010 Nov;24(6):757-74. doi: 10.1037/a0020314.

Task switching performance reveals heterogeneity amongst patients with mild 
cognitive impairment.

Sinai M(1), Phillips NA, Chertkow H, Kabani NJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology/Centre for Research in Human Development, Concordia 
University.

OBJECTIVE: To assess executive function in patients with mild cognitive 
impairment (MCI) and to determine whether task switching ability is associated 
with transition to Alzheimer's disease.
METHODS: Twenty-seven MCI patients and 19 older controls were tested using a 
cued letter-digit classification switching task. Sixteen patients could perform 
the task (MCI-able), 6 could not (MCI-unable), and 5 were able only with 
cognitive support (MCI-cue). Demographic, neuropsychological, event-related 
potential (ERP), MRI, and genetic data were also collected.
RESULTS: The four groups did not differ on age, gender, and APO E4 frequency. 
Compared to the controls, the MCI-unable group had significantly poorer 
performance on the Trail Making task (η2 = .430), lower education (η2 = .234), 
and smaller cortical volume (η2 = .245). Most MCI patients exhibited 
task-switching deficits but to vastly different degrees and with varying 
outcomes. The combined pattern of neuropsychological and task switching 
performance indicates that the MCI-able patients displayed memory retrieval 
difficulties (F(2,39) = 3.6, p = .036, MSE = 1.44), generally preserved task 
switching abilities, and had a high probability of remaining dementia-free at 
follow-up. The MCI-cue patients had increased mixing costs, F(2,39) = 11.0, p < 
.001, MSE = .07; the MCI-unable patients showed episodic memory deficits, and 
both groups had a high probability of poor outcome (i.e., developing AD or dying 
within four years).
CONCLUSION: This study demonstrates that variability in performance on measures 
of task-switching can highlight important heterogeneity in the MCI population.

DOI: 10.1037/a0020314
PMID: 20919763 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


267. Hum Brain Mapp. 2012 May;33(5):1137-54. doi: 10.1002/hbm.21277. Epub 2011 May 
31.

A brain-potential study of preparation for and execution of a task-switch with 
stimuli that afford only the relevant task.

Elchlepp H(1), Lavric A, Mizon GA, Monsell S.

Author information:
(1)School of Psychology, University of Exeter, United Kingdom. 
h.elchlepp@ex.ac.uk

Behavioural and neurophysiological studies of task-switching have tended to 
employ 'bivalent' stimuli (which afford responses in two tasks). Using brain 
potential recordings, we investigated task-switching with 'univalent' stimuli 
affording responses in only one of the tasks, and compared the outcomes to those 
recently obtained with bivalent stimuli (Lavric et al. [2008]: Eur J Neurosci 
1-14), in order to examine two phenomena. First, when only univalent stimuli are 
presented, the processing of task cues becomes optional. Our results showed that 
in these circumstances linguistic (but not pictorial) cues were still effective 
in eliciting at least some degree of preparation for a task-switch, as evidenced 
by the reduction in the error cost of switching at the longer preparation 
interval and by a posterior switch-induced ERP positivity at about 450-800 ms in 
the cue-stimulus interval. Second, single affordance stimuli not only reduced 
behavioural switch costs relative to bivalent stimuli; they also produced a 
smaller post-stimulus switch-induced negativity, consistent with the latter 
being a marker of conflict between task-sets. However, using stimuli not 
associated with responses in the alternative task did not completely eliminate 
the negativity. We speculate that the residue reflects other sources of 
conflict: attention to the irrelevant perceptual dimension and/or persistence of 
task goals.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/hbm.21277
PMCID: PMC6870019
PMID: 21630376 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


268. J Neurosci. 2006 Oct 25;26(43):11239-47. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2165-06.2006.

Brain regions mediating flexible rule use during development.

Crone EA(1), Donohue SE, Honomichl R, Wendelken C, Bunge SA.

Author information:
(1)Center for Mind and Brain, University of California, Davis, California 95616, 
USA. ecrone@fsw.leidenuniv.nl

During development, children improve at retrieving and using rules to guide 
their behavior and at flexibly switching between these rules. In this study, we 
used functional magnetic resonance imaging to examine the changes in brain 
function associated with developmental changes in flexible rule use. Three age 
groups (8-12, 13-17, and 18-25 years) performed a task in which they were cued 
to respond to target stimuli on the basis of simple task rules. Bivalent target 
stimuli were associated with different responses, depending on the rule, whereas 
univalent target stimuli were associated with fixed responses. The comparison of 
bivalent and univalent trials enabled the identification of regions modulated by 
demands on rule representation. The comparison of rule-switch and 
rule-repetition trials enabled the identification of regions involved in rule 
switching. We have used this task previously in adults and have shown that 
ventrolateral prefrontal cortex (VLPFC) and the (pre)-supplementary motor area 
(pre-SMA/SMA) have dissociable roles in task-switching, such that VLPFC is 
associated most closely with rule representation, and pre-SMA/SMA is associated 
with suppression of the previous task set (Crone et al., 2006a). Based on 
behavioral data in children (Crone et al., 2004), we had predicted that regions 
associated with task-set suppression would show mature patterns of activation 
earlier in development than regions associated with rule representation. Indeed, 
we found an adult-like pattern of activation in pre-SMA/SMA by adolescence, 
whereas the pattern of VLPFC activation differed among children, adolescents, 
and adults. These findings suggest that two components of task-switching--rule 
retrieval and task-set suppression--follow distinct neurodevelopmental 
trajectories.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2165-06.2006
PMCID: PMC6674662
PMID: 17065463 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


269. Neuropsychologia. 2009 Jun;47(7):1670-85. doi: 
10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2009.02.004. Epub 2009 Feb 11.

Attention, intention, and strategy in preparatory control.

Ruge H(1), Braver T, Meiran N.

Author information:
(1)Institute of General Psychology, Department of Psychology, Technische 
Universität Dresden, Germany. ruge@psychologie.tu-dresden.de

The neural mechanisms underlying different forms of preparatory control were 
examined using event-related fMRI. Preparatory brain activation was monitored in 
relation to different types of advance information: (1) random task cues 
indicating which of two possible tasks to perform upon subsequent target 
presentation; (2) task-ambiguous target stimuli; or (3) targets for which the 
correct response could be pre-determined. Three types of activation pattern were 
observed in different brain regions. First, more posterior regions of lateral 
prefrontal cortex (LPFC) and parietal cortex were activated by both advance task 
cues and advance targets, but with increased and more sustained activation for 
the latter. Second, more anterior regions of LPFC and parietal cortex were 
selectively activated by advance targets. Importantly, in these regions 
preparatory activation was not further modulated by the availability of advance 
response information. In contrast, preparatory activation in a third set of 
brain regions, including medial frontal cortex, reflected the utilization of 
advance response information, but by only a subset of participants. These 
results suggest three types of preparatory control: attentional 
(stimulus-oriented), intentional (action-oriented), and a possibly strategic 
component that might determine inter-individual differences in response 
readiness. Notably, the absence of regions selectively or even preferentially 
activated during cue-based preparation argues against certain conceptualizations 
of task-selective attention under cued task-switching conditions.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2009.02.004
PMCID: PMC2674875
PMID: 19397862 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


270. Neuropsychologia. 2014 Sep;62:375-89. doi: 
10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2014.04.014. Epub 2014 Apr 30.

A neural network model of individual differences in task switching abilities.

Herd SA(1), O'Reilly RC(1), Hazy TE(1), Chatham CH(1), Brant AM(1), Friedman 
NP(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology and Neuroscience, University of Colorado Boulder, 
345 UCB, Boulder, CO 80309, USA.
(2)Department of Psychology and Neuroscience, University of Colorado Boulder, 
345 UCB, Boulder, CO 80309, USA; Institute for Behavioral Genetics, University 
of Colorado Boulder, 447 UCB, Boulder, CO 80309, USA. Electronic address: 
Naomi.friedman@colorado.edu.

We use a biologically grounded neural network model to investigate the brain 
mechanisms underlying individual differences specific to the selection and 
instantiation of representations that exert cognitive control in task switching. 
Existing computational models of task switching do not focus on individual 
differences and so cannot explain why task switching abilities are separable 
from other executive function (EF) abilities (such as response inhibition). We 
explore hypotheses regarding neural mechanisms underlying the 
"Shifting-Specific" and "Common EF" components of EF proposed in the 
Unity/Diversity model (Miyake & Friedman, 2012) and similar components in 
related theoretical frameworks. We do so by adapting a well-developed neural 
network model of working memory (Prefrontal cortex, Basal ganglia Working Memory 
or PBWM; Hazy, Frank, & O'Reilly, 2007) to task switching and the Stroop task, 
and comparing its behavior on those tasks under a variety of individual 
difference manipulations. Results are consistent with the hypotheses that 
variation specific to task switching (i.e., Shifting-Specific) may be related to 
uncontrolled, automatic persistence of goal representations, whereas variation 
general to multiple EFs (i.e., Common EF) may be related to the strength of PFC 
representations and their effect on processing in the remainder of the cognitive 
system. Moreover, increasing signal to noise ratio in PFC, theoretically tied to 
levels of tonic dopamine and a genetic polymorphism in the COMT gene, reduced 
Stroop interference but increased switch costs. This stability-flexibility 
tradeoff provides an explanation for why these two EF components sometimes show 
opposing correlations with other variables such as attention problems and 
self-restraint.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2014.04.014
PMCID: PMC4167201
PMID: 24791709 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


271. Neuroreport. 2022 Jun 8;33(9):408-412. doi: 10.1097/WNR.0000000000001799. Epub 
2022 May 11.

Impact of hierarchical processing levels on division of labor: neural 
electrophysiological evidence from a joint rule shifting.

Han J(1)(2), Guan L(1)(2), Zhu C(3).

Author information:
(1)Research Center of Brain and Cognitive Neuroscience, Liaoning Normal 
University.
(2)Key Laboratory of Brain and Cognitive Neuroscience, Liaoning Province.
(3)School of physical education, Liaoning Normal University, Dalian, China.

OBJECTIVES: Although previous studies have revealed the behavioral and neural 
mechanisms underlying cognitive control, the neural electrophysiological process 
in joint task switching has rarely been discussed. Moreover, the hierarchy 
process remains unclear. Therefore, the present study aimed to explore the 
neural mechanism of a target when two actors use division of labor between 
action selections in a joint hierarchical rule-shifting situation.
METHODS: The present study employed a joint hierarchical rule shifting paradigm, 
and each participant was responsible for the selection of one type of action 
(left key and right key). The cue was the letter 'R' with three features, which 
indicated the hierarchical rule of the current trial. The target was an Arabic 
numeral (1-9, except 5). Participants made a magnitude judgement or a parity 
judgment based on the high and low hierarchical features of cues.
RESULTS: The P2 component was smaller in the high-shift condition than in the 
repeat condition; however, the high-shift condition elicited a larger N2 
amplitude than the low-shift and repeat conditions. We believe that the current 
P2 is related to selective attention to the hierarchical features of rules, and 
N2 is related to conflict control. In addition, the high-shift condition had the 
largest P3 amplitude, which indicates that this condition has the largest extent 
of update and leads to the most unstable association between rule and stimuli.
CONCLUSIONS: The study demonstrated that participants had dynamic brain 
responses to target stimuli in the joint rule-shifting situation. In other 
words, participants first confirmed the actor of the current target and then 
processed the target stimuli themselves.

Copyright © 2022 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1097/WNR.0000000000001799
PMID: 35594430 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


272. Hum Brain Mapp. 2025 Oct 15;46(15):e70376. doi: 10.1002/hbm.70376.

Neural Correlates of Goal-Directed Preparation to Switching Across External and 
Internal Domains.

Calzolari S(1)(2), Ingram BT(1)(2), Bagshaw AP(1)(2), Fernández-Espejo D(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Human Brain Health, University of Birmingham, Birmingham, UK.
(2)School of Psychology, University of Birmingham, Birmingham, UK.

While it is well accepted that the human brain shifts between internal and 
external monitoring both during tasks and at rest, no task-switching studies 
have focused on brain changes when switching from and to self-referential 
processing. Using a cued task-switching design, we explored the preparatory fMRI 
activation associated with switching not only within externally oriented tasks, 
but also within self-referential tasks, as well as between these two domains. We 
found that preparing to perform internal tasks activated the default mode 
network, while preparing for external tasks activated regions of the dorsal 
attention network (DAN). Switch preparation activated left-lateralised DAN 
regions with ventrolateral peaks as well as dorsal precuneus, posterior 
cingulate and supplementary motor area. These results show a dynamic pattern of 
communication across networks associated with external and internal domain 
processing and common preparatory activation in working memory and executive 
control regions. In particular, the dorsal precuneus was consistently engaged in 
task-switch preparation, suggesting a key role of this region in cognitive 
control, in the context of switching across external and internal domains.

© 2025 The Author(s). Human Brain Mapping published by Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/hbm.70376
PMCID: PMC12522180
PMID: 41090961 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


273. J Cogn Neurosci. 2007 Dec;19(12):1974-82. doi: 10.1162/jocn.2007.19.12.1974.

The cerebellum mediates conflict resolution.

Schweizer TA(1), Oriet C, Meiran N, Alexander MP, Cusimano M, Stuss DT.

Author information:
(1)Rotman Research Institute, Baycrest, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. 
tschweizer@rotman-baycrest.on.ca

Regions within the frontal and parietal cortex have been implicated as important 
neural correlates for cognitive control during conflict resolution. Despite the 
extensive reciprocal connectivity between the cerebellum and these putatively 
critical cortical areas, a role for the cerebellum in conflict resolution has 
never been identified. We used a task-switching paradigm that separates 
processes related to task-set switching and the management of response conflict 
independent of motor processing. Eleven patients with chronic, focal lesions to 
the cerebellum and 11 healthy controls were compared. Patients were slower and 
less accurate in conditions involving conflict resolution. In the absence of 
response conflict, however, tasks-witching abilities were not impaired in our 
patients. The cerebellum may play an important role in coordinating with other 
areas of cortex to modulate active response states. These results are the first 
demonstration of impaired conflict resolution following cerebellar lesions in 
the presence of an intact prefrontal cortex.

DOI: 10.1162/jocn.2007.19.12.1974
PMID: 17892387 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


274. Neuropsychologia. 2009 Nov;47(13):2835-42. doi: 
10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2009.06.008. Epub 2009 Jun 21.

White matter tracts associated with set-shifting in healthy aging.

Perry ME(1), McDonald CR, Hagler DJ Jr, Gharapetian L, Kuperman JM, Koyama AK, 
Dale AM, McEvoy LK.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cognitive Science, University of California, San Diego, 9500 
Gilman Dr., La Jolla, CA 92093, USA.

Attentional set-shifting ability, commonly assessed with the Trail Making Test 
(TMT), decreases with increasing age in adults. Since set-shifting performance 
relies on activity in widespread brain regions, deterioration of the white 
matter tracts that connect these regions may underlie the age-related decrease 
in performance. We used an automated fiber tracking method to investigate the 
relationship between white matter integrity in several cortical association 
tracts and TMT performance in a sample of 24 healthy adults, 21-80 years. 
Diffusion tensor images were used to compute average fractional anisotropy (FA) 
for five cortical association tracts, the corpus callosum (CC), and the 
corticospinal tract (CST), which served as a control. Results showed that 
advancing age was associated with declines in set-shifting performance and with 
decreased FA in the CC and in association tracts that connect frontal cortex to 
more posterior brain regions, including the inferior fronto-occipital fasciculus 
(IFOF), uncinate fasciculus (UF), and superior longitudinal fasciculus (SLF). 
Declines in average FA in these tracts, and in average FA of the right inferior 
longitudinal fasciculus (ILF), were associated with increased time to completion 
on the set-shifting subtask of the TMT but not with the simple sequencing 
subtask. FA values in these tracts were strong mediators of the effect of age on 
set-shifting performance. Automated tractography methods can enhance our 
understanding of the fiber systems involved in performance of specific cognitive 
tasks and of the functional consequences of age-related changes in those 
systems.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2009.06.008
PMCID: PMC2749901
PMID: 19540862 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure Statement: We confirm that we have 
read the Journal's position on the issues involved in ethical publication and 
affirm that this report is consistent with those guidelines. Anders M. Dale is a 
founder and holds equity in CorTechs Labs, Inc and also serves on the Scientific 
Advisory Board. The terms of this arrangement have been reviewed and approved by 
the University of California, San Diego in accordance with its conflict of 
interest policies.


275. Am J Psychiatry. 2006 Jun;163(6):1044-51. doi: 10.1176/ajp.2006.163.6.1044.

Task-specific hypoactivation in prefrontal and temporoparietal brain regions 
during motor inhibition and task switching in medication-naive children and 
adolescents with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder.

Smith AB(1), Taylor E, Brammer M, Toone B, Rubia K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Child Psychiatry, Institute of Psychiatry, King's College, 
London, SE5 8AF, UK.

Comment in
    Am J Psychiatry. 2006 Jun;163(6):957-60. doi: 10.1176/ajp.2006.163.6.957.

OBJECTIVE: A relatively small number of functional imaging studies of attention 
deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) have shown abnormal prefrontal and 
striatal brain activation during tasks of motor response inhibition. However, 
the potential confound of previous medication exposure has not yet been 
addressed, and no functional imaging study exists to date on medication-naive 
children and adolescents with ADHD. The aim of this study was to investigate the 
neural substrates of a range of motor and cognitive inhibitory functions in a 
relatively large group of children and adolescents with ADHD who had never 
previously been exposed to medication.
METHOD: Nineteen boys with ADHD and 27 healthy age- and IQ-matched boys 
underwent functional MRI to compare brain activation during performance of tasks 
that assessed motor response inhibition (go/no go task), cognitive interference 
inhibition (motor Stroop task), and cognitive flexibility (switch task).
RESULTS: Boys with ADHD showed decreased activation in the left rostral mesial 
frontal cortex during the go/no go task and decreased activation in the 
bilateral prefrontal and temporal lobes and right parietal lobe during the 
switch task. No significant group differences were observed during motor Stroop 
task performance.
CONCLUSION: Abnormal brain activation was observed in medication-naive children 
and adolescents with ADHD during tasks involving motor inhibition and task 
switching, suggesting that hypoactivation in this patient group is unrelated to 
long-term stimulant exposure. Furthermore, functional abnormalities are 
task-specific and extend from frontostriatal to parietal and temporal cortices.

DOI: 10.1176/ajp.2006.163.6.1044
PMID: 16741205 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


276. Hum Brain Mapp. 2013 Aug;34(8):1910-20. doi: 10.1002/hbm.22036. Epub 2012 Mar 
22.

Differential roles of inferior frontal and inferior parietal cortex in task 
switching: evidence from stimulus-categorization switching and response-modality 
switching.

Philipp AM(1), Weidner R, Koch I, Fink GR.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Psychology, RWTH Aachen University, Aachen, Germany. 
philipp@psych.rwth-aachen.de

We used fMRI to investigate both common and differential neural mechanisms 
underlying two distinct types of switching requirements, namely switching 
between stimulus categorizations (color vs. form) and switching between response 
modalities (hand vs. foot responses). Both types of switching induced similar 
behavioral shift costs. However, at the neural level, switching between stimulus 
categorizations led to left-hemispheric activations including the inferior 
frontal gyrus as well as the intraparietal sulcus extending to the superior 
parietal gyrus and the supramarginal gyrus. In contrast, switching between 
response modalities was associated mainly with left-hemispheric activation of 
the intraparietal sulcus and the supramarginal gyrus. A conjunction analysis 
indicated common activation of the left intraparietal sulcus and the 
supramarginal gyrus for both types of switching. Together, these results qualify 
previous claims about a general role of the left prefrontal cortex in task 
control by suggesting that the left inferior frontal gyrus is specifically 
involved in switching between stimulus categorizations, whereas parietal cortex 
is more generally implicated in the selection of action rules.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/hbm.22036
PMCID: PMC6870067
PMID: 22438215 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


277. Cogn Neuropsychol. 2011 Jul;28(5):363-85. doi: 10.1080/02643294.2012.656587.

An impaired attentional dwell time after parietal and frontal lesions related to 
impaired selective attention not unilateral neglect.

Correani A(1), Humphreys GW.

Author information:
(1)Behavioural Brain Sciences Centre, School of Psychology, University of 
Birmingham, Birmingham, UK. ale.correani@gmail.com

The attentional blink, a measure of the temporal dynamics of visual processing, 
has been documented to be more pronounced following brain lesions that are 
associated with visual neglect. This suggests that, in addition to their spatial 
bias in attention, neglect patients may have a prolonged dwell time for 
attention. Here the attentional dwell time was examined in patients with damage 
focused on either posterior parietal or frontal cortices. In three experiments, 
we show that there is an abnormally pronounced attentional dwell time, which 
does not differ in patients with posterior parietal and with frontal lobe 
lesions, and this is associated with a measure of selective attention but not 
with measures of spatial bias in selection. These data occurred both when we 
attempted to match patients and controls for overall differences in performance 
and when a single set stimulus exposure was used across participants. In 
Experiments 1 and 2, requiring report of colour-form conjunctions, there was 
evidence that the patients were also impaired at temporal binding, showing 
errors in feature combination across stimuli and in reporting in the correct 
temporal order. In Experiment 3, requiring only the report of features but 
introducing task switching led to similar results. The data suggest that damage 
to a frontoparietal network can compromise temporal selection of visual stimuli; 
however, this is not necessarily related to a deficit in hemispatial visual 
attention but it is to impaired target selection. We discuss the implications 
for understanding visual selection.

DOI: 10.1080/02643294.2012.656587
PMID: 22292859 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


278. J Cogn Neurosci. 2017 Jan;29(1):137-149. doi: 10.1162/jocn_a_01023. Epub 2016 
Aug 30.

The Role of Anterior Cingulate Cortex in the Affective Evaluation of Conflict.

Braem S(1), King JA(2), Korb FM(2), Krebs RM(1), Notebaert W(1), Egner T(2).

Author information:
(1)Ghent University.
(2)Duke University.

An influential theory of ACC function argues that this brain region plays a 
crucial role in the affective evaluation of performance monitoring and control 
demands. Specifically, control-demanding processes such as response conflict are 
thought to be registered as aversive signals by ACC, which in turn triggers 
processing adjustments to support avoidance learning. In support of conflict 
being treated as an aversive event, recent behavioral studies demonstrated that 
incongruent (i.e., conflict inducing), relative to congruent, stimuli can speed 
up subsequent negative, relative to positive, affective picture processing. 
Here, we used fMRI to investigate directly whether ACC activity in response to 
negative versus positive pictures is modulated by preceding control demands, 
consisting of conflict and task-switching conditions. The results show that 
negative, relative to positive, pictures elicited higher ACC activation after 
congruent, relative to incongruent, trials, suggesting that ACC's response to 
negative (positive) pictures was indeed affectively primed by incongruent 
(congruent) trials. Interestingly, this pattern of results was observed on task 
repetitions but disappeared on task alternations. This study supports the 
proposal that conflict induces negative affect and is the first to show that 
this affective signal is reflected in ACC activation.

DOI: 10.1162/jocn_a_01023
PMCID: PMC5341786
PMID: 27575278 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


279. PLoS One. 2020 Feb 18;15(2):e0228541. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0228541. 
eCollection 2020.

Anodal tDCS over the right parietal but not frontal cortex enhances the ability 
to overcome task set inhibition during task switching.

Sdoia S(1), Zivi P(1), Ferlazzo F(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Sapienza University, Rome, Italy.

Switching between tasks requires individuals to inhibit mental representations 
of the previous task demands and to activate representations of the new task 
demands. The inhibition of the executed task remains active for a while so that 
when the inhibited task set must be re-activated shortly after, the need to 
overcome residual task set inhibition leads to behavioral costs. In a 
sham-controlled balanced-order within-subjects experimental design we 
investigated whether applying right anodal/left cathodal transcranial direct 
current stimulation (tDCS) over the dorsolateral prefrontal or parietal cortex 
modulated the ability to overcome persistent task inhibition during task 
switching. Results showed that right anodal/left cathodal tDCS over the parietal 
cortex improves performance selectively when switching back to a recently 
inhibited task that requires previous inhibition to be overcome. Right 
Anodal/left cathodal tDCS over the prefrontal cortex improves performance during 
task switching in general, either when re-engaging in a inhibited task or when 
engaging in a non-inhibited task. Results suggest a different contribution of 
prefrontal and parietal regions to task switching, with parietal cortex being 
selectively involved in overcoming persistent task inhibition and prefrontal 
cortex being more generally involved in the control of task set during task 
switching.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0228541
PMCID: PMC7028258
PMID: 32069294 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.


280. Cortex. 2016 Jan;74:118-33. doi: 10.1016/j.cortex.2015.11.004. Epub 2015 Nov 18.

Fronto-striatal organization: Defining functional and microstructural substrates 
of behavioural flexibility.

Morris LS(1), Kundu P(2), Dowell N(3), Mechelmans DJ(4), Favre P(5), Irvine 
MA(4), Robbins TW(1), Daw N(6), Bullmore ET(7), Harrison NA(3), Voon V(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom; 
Behavioural and Clinical Neuroscience Institute, University of Cambridge, 
Cambridge, United Kingdom.
(2)Department of Psychiatry, University of Cambridge, Addenbrooke's Hospital, 
Cambridge, United Kingdom; Section on Functional Imaging Methods, National 
Institute of Mental Health, Bethesda, MD, USA.
(3)Department of Psychiatry, Brighton and Sussex Medical School, Brighton, 
United Kingdom.
(4)Department of Psychiatry, University of Cambridge, Addenbrooke's Hospital, 
Cambridge, United Kingdom.
(5)Laboratory of Psychology and Neurocognition, University Grenoble Alpes, 
Grenoble, France.
(6)Center for Neural Science and Department of Psychology, New York University, 
New York, NY, USA.
(7)Behavioural and Clinical Neuroscience Institute, University of Cambridge, 
Cambridge, United Kingdom; Department of Psychiatry, University of Cambridge, 
Addenbrooke's Hospital, Cambridge, United Kingdom; Cambridgeshire and 
Peterborough NHS Foundation Trust, Cambridge, United Kingdom; NIHR Cambridge 
Biomedical Research Centre, Cambridge, United Kingdom.
(8)Behavioural and Clinical Neuroscience Institute, University of Cambridge, 
Cambridge, United Kingdom; Department of Psychiatry, University of Cambridge, 
Addenbrooke's Hospital, Cambridge, United Kingdom; Cambridgeshire and 
Peterborough NHS Foundation Trust, Cambridge, United Kingdom; NIHR Cambridge 
Biomedical Research Centre, Cambridge, United Kingdom. Electronic address: 
vv247@cam.ac.uk.

Discrete yet overlapping frontal-striatal circuits mediate broadly dissociable 
cognitive and behavioural processes. Using a recently developed multi-echo 
resting-state functional MRI (magnetic resonance imaging) sequence with greatly 
enhanced signal compared to noise ratios, we map frontal cortical functional 
projections to the striatum and striatal projections through the direct and 
indirect basal ganglia circuit. We demonstrate distinct limbic (ventromedial 
prefrontal regions, ventral striatum - VS, ventral tegmental area - VTA), motor 
(supplementary motor areas - SMAs, putamen, substantia nigra) and cognitive 
(lateral prefrontal and caudate) functional connectivity. We confirm the 
functional nature of the cortico-striatal connections, demonstrating correlates 
of well-established goal-directed behaviour (involving medial orbitofrontal 
cortex - mOFC and VS), probabilistic reversal learning (lateral orbitofrontal 
cortex - lOFC and VS) and attentional shifting (dorsolateral prefrontal cortex - 
dlPFC and VS) while assessing habitual model-free (SMA and putamen) behaviours 
on an exploratory basis. We further use neurite orientation dispersion and 
density imaging (NODDI) to show that more goal-directed model-based learning 
(MBc) is also associated with higher mOFC neurite density and habitual 
model-free learning (MFc) implicates neurite complexity in the putamen. This 
data highlights similarities between a computational account of MFc and 
conventional measures of habit learning. We highlight the intrinsic functional 
and structural architecture of parallel systems of behavioural control.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cortex.2015.11.004
PMCID: PMC4729321
PMID: 26673945 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


281. Sci Rep. 2017 Oct 24;7(1):13910. doi: 10.1038/s41598-017-14490-x.

On the relevance of the alpha frequency oscillation's small-world network 
architecture for cognitive flexibility.

Wolff N(1), Zink N(1), Stock AK(1), Beste C(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Cognitive Neurophysiology, Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 
Faculty of Medicine, TU, Dresden, Germany.
(2)Cognitive Neurophysiology, Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 
Faculty of Medicine, TU, Dresden, Germany. 
christian.beste@uniklinikum-dresden.de.
(3)Experimental Neurobiology, National Institute of Mental Health, Klecany, 
Czech Republic. christian.beste@uniklinikum-dresden.de.

Cognitive flexibility is a major requirement for successful behavior. nNeural 
oscillations in the alpha frequency band were repeatedly associated with 
cognitive flexibility in task-switching paradigms. Alpha frequencies are 
modulated by working memory load and are used to process information during task 
switching, however we do not know how this oscillatory network communication is 
modulated. In order to understand the mechanisms that drive cognitive 
flexibility, ERPs, oscillatory power and how the communication within these 
networks is organized are of importance. The EEG data show that during phases 
reflecting preparatory processes to pre-activate task sets, alpha oscillatory 
power but not the small world properties of the alpha network architecture was 
modulated. During the switching only the N2 ERP component showed clear 
modulations. After the response, alpha oscillatory power reinstates and 
therefore seems to be important to deactivate or maintain the previous task set. 
For these reactive control processes the network architecture in terms of 
small-world properties is modulated. Effects of memory load on small-world 
aspects were seen in repetition trials, where small-world properties were higher 
when memory processes were relevant. These results suggest that the alpha 
oscillatory network becomes more small-world-like when reactive control 
processes during task switching are less complex.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-017-14490-x
PMCID: PMC5654836
PMID: 29066804 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.


282. PLoS One. 2015 Apr 13;10(4):e0123073. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0123073. 
eCollection 2015.

Reward sensitivity modulates brain activity in the prefrontal cortex, ACC and 
striatum during task switching.

Fuentes-Claramonte P(1), Ávila C(1), Rodríguez-Pujadas A(1), Ventura-Campos 
N(1), Bustamante JC(2), Costumero V(1), Rosell-Negre P(1), Barrós-Loscertales 
A(1).

Author information:
(1)Departament de Psicologia Bàsica, Clínica i Psicobiologia, Universitat Jaume 
I, Castelló de la Plana, Spain.
(2)Departamento de Psicología y Sociología, Facultad de Educación, Universidad 
de Zaragoza, Zaragoza, Spain.

Current perspectives on cognitive control acknowledge that individual 
differences in motivational dispositions may modulate cognitive processes in the 
absence of reward contingencies. This work aimed to study the relationship 
between individual differences in Behavioral Activation System (BAS) sensitivity 
and the neural underpinnings involved in processing a switching cue in a 
task-switching paradigm. BAS sensitivity was hypothesized to modulate brain 
activity in frontal regions, ACC and the striatum. Twenty-eight healthy 
participants underwent fMRI while performing a switching task, which elicited 
activity in fronto-striatal regions during the processing of the switch cue. BAS 
sensitivity was negatively associated with activity in the lateral prefrontal 
cortex, anterior cingulate cortex and the ventral striatum. Combined with 
previous results, our data indicate that BAS sensitivity modulates the 
neurocognitive processes involved in task switching in a complex manner 
depending on task demands. Therefore, individual differences in motivational 
dispositions may influence cognitive processing in the absence of reward 
contingencies.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0123073
PMCID: PMC4395363
PMID: 25875640 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.


283. Brain. 2008 Jan;131(Pt 1):155-64. doi: 10.1093/brain/awm277. Epub 2007 Dec 7.

Neural correlates of cognitive inflexibility during task-switching in 
obsessive-compulsive disorder.

Gu BM(1), Park JY, Kang DH, Lee SJ, Yoo SY, Jo HJ, Choi CH, Lee JM, Kwon JS.

Author information:
(1)Interdisciplinary Program in Brain Science, Seoul National University College 
of Medicine, Korea.

A deficit in cognitive flexibility is acknowledged as a cognitive trait for 
obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD). However, no investigations to date have 
used a cognitive activation paradigm to specify the neural correlates of this 
deficit in OCD. The objective of this study was to clarify how abnormal brain 
activities relate to cognitive inflexibility in OCD, using a task-switching 
paradigm. A task-switching paradigm which has two kinds of task-set was applied 
to 21 patients with OCD and 21 healthy subjects of matching age, IQ and sex, 
during an event-related functional magnetic resonance imaging experiment. 
Compared with the healthy subjects, patients with OCD exhibited a significantly 
higher error rate in task-switch trials (P < 0.05). Healthy controls showed 
significant activation in various areas, including dorsal frontal-striatal 
regions, during task-switching, whereas patients with OCD showed no activation 
in these areas. Significant differences were also observed in the dorsal 
frontal-striatal regions and ventromedial prefrontal and right orbitofrontal 
cortexes between patients with OCD and healthy controls. Correlation analysis 
indicated that the activations of orbitofrontal cortex were related with the 
performance in both groups and also with the activation of anterior cingulate 
cortex in the OCD group. These findings replicate previous studies of cognitive 
inflexibility in OCD and provide neural correlates related to a task-switching 
deficit in OCD. The results suggest that impaired task-switching ability in OCD 
patients might be associated with an imbalance in brain activation between 
dorsal and ventral frontal-striatal circuits.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/awm277
PMID: 18065438 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


284. Front Psychol. 2023 Mar 13;14:1084022. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2023.1084022. 
eCollection 2023.

Neural correlates of the attention training technique as used in metacognitive 
therapy - A randomized sham-controlled fMRI study in healthy volunteers.

Jahn N(1), Sinke C(1)(2), Kayali Ö(1), Krug S(1), Leichter E(1), Peschel S(1), 
Müller T(1), Burak A(1), Krüger THC(1)(2)(3), Kahl KG(1), Heitland I(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Social Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, Hannover 
Medical School, Hanover, Germany.
(2)Department of Psychiatry, Social Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, Division of 
Clinical Psychology and Sexual Medicine, Hannover Medical School, Hanover, 
Germany.
(3)Center for Systems Neuroscience, Hanover, Germany.

INTRODUCTION: The Attention Training Technique (ATT) developed as part of 
metacognitive therapy is a psychotherapeutic treatment method used to enhance 
top-down attentional flexibility and control. This study investigated potential 
neurocognitive changes due to ATT and its underlying neural mechanisms using 
pre-to-post functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI).
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Fifty-four healthy participants were subjected to a 
randomized, sham-controlled attention training and evaluated using a 
neurocognitive test battery that partly took place in an fMRI environment. 
Participants received two doses ATT or sham ATT daily for 1 week. On day eight, 
all subjects completed the neurocognitive test battery again.
RESULTS: After the training, the ATT group showed a significant improvement in 
reaction times regarding attentional disengagement compared to the sham ATT 
group. fMRI data showed decreased levels of activation in the anterior cingulate 
cortex (ACC) when comparing the ATT group to the sham ATT group during 
attentional disengagement post intervention. No ATT > sham ATT effects were 
found regarding selective auditory attention, working memory performance and 
inhibitory control.
DISCUSSION: These findings putatively indicate that ATT facilitates faster 
attention allocation and increased attentional flexibility in healthy subjects. 
The fMRI results suggest this ATT-dependent improvement is accompanied by 
reduced ACC activity, indicating a more flexible attentional state.

Copyright © 2023 Jahn, Sinke, Kayali, Krug, Leichter, Peschel, Müller, Burak, 
Krüger, Kahl and Heitland.

DOI: 10.3389/fpsyg.2023.1084022
PMCID: PMC10040584
PMID: 36993887

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.


285. Front Hum Neurosci. 2017 Jun 29;11:346. doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2017.00346. 
eCollection 2017.

Adverse Effects of the Apolipoprotein E ε4 Allele on Episodic Memory, Task 
Switching and Gray Matter Volume in Healthy Young Adults.

Nao J(1), Sun H(2), Wang Q(2), Ma S(1), Zhang S(1), Dong X(1), Ma Y(1), Wang 
X(2), Zheng D(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Shengjing Hospital of China Medical 
UniversityShenyang, China.
(2)Department of Radiology, Shengjing Hospital of China Medical 
UniversityShenyang, China.

Many studies have shown that healthy elderly subjects and patients with 
Alzheimer's disease (AD) who carry the apolipoprotein E (ApoE) ε4 allele have 
worse cognitive function and more severe brain atrophy than non-carriers. 
However, it remains unclear whether this ApoE polymorphism leads to changes of 
cognition and brain morphology in healthy young adults. In this study, we used 
an established model to measure verbal episodic memory and core executive 
function (EF) components (response inhibition, working memory and task 
switching) in 32 ApoE ε4 carriers and 40 non-carriers between 20 years and 40 
years of age. To do this, we carried out an adapted auditory verbal learning 
test and three computerized EF tasks. High-resolution head magnetic resonance 
scans were performed in all participants and voxel-based morphometry (VBM) was 
used for image processing and analysis. Multivariate analysis of variance 
(ANOVA) performed on memory measures showed that the overall verbal episodic 
memory of ApoE ε4 carriers was significantly worse than non-carriers (Wilk's λ = 
4.884, P = 0.004). No significant differences were detected in overall EF 
between the two groups. Post hoc analyses revealed group differences in terms of 
immediate recall, recognition and task switching, which favored non-carriers. 
VBM analysis showed gray matter (GM) bilateral reductions in the medial and 
dorsolateral frontal, parietal and left temporal cortices in the carrier group 
relative to the non-carrier group, which were most significant in the bilateral 
anterior and middle cingulate gyri. However, these changes in GM volume were not 
directly associated with changes in cognitive function. Our data show that the 
ApoE ε4 allele is associated with poorer performance in verbal episodic memory 
and task switching, and a reduction in GM volume in healthy young adults, 
suggesting that the effects of ApoE ε4 upon cognition and brain morphology exist 
long before the possible occurrence of AD.

DOI: 10.3389/fnhum.2017.00346
PMCID: PMC5489690
PMID: 28706481


286. J Cogn Neurosci. 2018 Sep;30(9):1330-1344. doi: 10.1162/jocn_a_01286. Epub 2018 
May 23.

The Influence of Dopamine on Cognitive Flexibility Is Mediated by Functional 
Connectivity in Young but Not Older Adults.

Berry AS(1), Shah VD(2), Jagust WJ(2).

Author information:
(1)Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory.
(2)University of California, Berkeley.

Dopaminergic signaling in striatum is strongly implicated in executive functions 
including cognitive flexibility. However, there is a paucity of multimodal 
research in humans defining the nature of relationships between endogenous 
dopamine, striatal network activity, and cognition. Here, we measured dopamine 
synthesis capacity in young and older adults using the PET tracer 
6-[18F]fluoro-l- m-tyrosine and examined its relationship with cognitive 
performance and functional connectivity during an fMRI study of task switching. 
Aging is associated with alteration in dopamine function, including profound 
losses in dopamine receptors but an apparent elevation in dopamine synthesis. A 
compensatory benefit of upregulated dopamine synthesis in aging has not been 
established. Across young and older adults, we found that cognitive flexibility 
(low behavioral switch cost) was associated with stronger task-related 
functional connectivity within canonical fronto-striato-thalamic circuits 
connecting left inferior frontal gyrus, dorsal caudate nucleus (DCA) and ventral 
lateral/ventral anterior thalamic nuclei. In young adults, functional 
connectivity mediated the influence of DCA dopamine synthesis capacity on switch 
cost. For older adults, these relationships were modified such that DCA 
synthesis capacity and connectivity interacted to influence switch cost. Older 
adults with most elevated synthesis capacity maintained the pattern of 
connectivity-cognition relationships observed in youth, whereas these 
relationships were not evident for older adults with low synthesis capacity. 
Together, these findings suggest a role of dopamine in tuning striatal circuits 
to benefit executive function in young adults and clarify the functional impact 
of elevated dopamine synthesis capacity in aging.

DOI: 10.1162/jocn_a_01286
PMCID: PMC6698144
PMID: 29791298 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


287. J Nutr Health Aging. 2018;22(7):837-846. doi: 10.1007/s12603-018-1028-2.

A Combination of Essential Fatty Acids, Panax Ginseng Extract, and Green Tea 
Catechins Modifies Brain fMRI Signals in Healthy Older Adults.

Carmichael OT(1), Pillai S, Shankapal P, McLellan A, Kay DG, Gold BT, Keller JN.

Author information:
(1)Owen Carmichael, Pennington Biomedical Research Center, 6400 Perkins Road, 
Baton Rouge, LA, 70808, USA, Owen.Carmichael@pbrc.edu.

OBJECTIVES: To assess the effects of a combination of omega 3 essential fatty 
acids, green tea catechins, and ginsenosides on cognition and brain functioning 
in healthy older adults.
DESIGN: Double-blind, placebo-controlled, crossover design randomized controlled 
trial with 26-day intervention phases and a 30-day washout period.
SETTING: The Institute for Dementia Research and Prevention at the Pennington 
Biomedical Research Center.
PARTICIPANTS: Ten independently-living, cognitively-healthy older adults (mean 
age: 67.3 + 2.01 years).
INTERVENTION: Daily consumption of an investigational product (trade name 
"Cerbella TM") consisting of an emulsified liquid combination of standardized 
fish oil, panax ginseng extract, and green tea catechins in a flavored base of 
lecithin phospholipids optimized to maximize bioavailability of the active 
ingredients.
MEASUREMENTS: Before and after supplementation with the investigational product 
or placebo, participants completed cognitive tests including the Mini Mental 
State Exam (MMSE), Stroop test, Digit Symbol Substitution Test (DSST), and 
Immediate and Delayed Recall tests, as well as functional magnetic resonance 
imaging (fMRI) during a standard cognitive task switching paradigm.
RESULTS: Performance on the MMSE, Stroop test, and DSST increased significantly 
over one month of supplementation with the investigational product (one-sample t 
tests, p<.05) although differences between these changes and corresponding 
changes during supplementation with placebo were not significant (two-sample t 
tests, p>.05). During supplementation with the investigational product, brain 
activation during task performance increased significantly more than during 
supplementation with placebo in brain regions known to be activated by this task 
(anterior and posterior cingulate cortex). Functional connectivity during task 
execution between task regions (middle frontal gyrus and anterior cingulate 
cortex) increased significantly during supplementation with the investigational 
product, relative to placebo. Functional connectivity during rest between task 
regions (precentral gyrus and middle frontal gyrus) and default mode network 
regions (medial frontal gyrus and precuneus) decreased during supplementation 
with the investigational product relative to placebo, suggesting greater 
segregation of task and rest related brain activity.
CONCLUSION: One-month supplementation with a combination of omega 3 essential 
fatty acids, green tea catechins, and ginsenosides was associated with 
suggestive changes in cognitive functioning as well as modification of brain 
activation and brain functional connectivity in cognitively healthy older 
adults.

DOI: 10.1007/s12603-018-1028-2
PMCID: PMC12880479
PMID: 30080229 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Dr. Carmichael received contract support from 
Neurodyn, Inc. for the conduct of the reported clinical trial on Cerbella (TM), 
for travel, for data analysis, and for the writing of this manuscript. Cerbella 
(TM) is a Neurodyn, Inc. product. Dr. Carmichael also received funding from the 
Pennington Biomedical Research Foundation. Dr. Gold has nothing to disclose. Dr. 
McLellan reports personal fees from Neurodyn and grants from ACOA during the 
conduct of the study; personal fees from Neurodyn outside the submitted work. In 
addition, Dr. McLellan has a patent 62460021 pending related to this 
manuscript.Dr. Keller received contract support from Neurodyn, Inc. for the 
conduct of the reported clinical trial on Cerbella (TM). Cerbella (TM) is a 
Neurodyn, Inc. product. Sreekrishna Pillai has nothing to disclose. Dr. 
Shankapal has nothing to disclose. Dr. Kay reports personal fees from Neurodyn 
and grants from ACOA during the conduct of the study; personal fees from 
Neurodyn outside the submitted work. In addition, Dr. Kay has a patent 62460021 
pending related to this manuscript.


288. Hum Brain Mapp. 2014 Oct;35(10):5141-52. doi: 10.1002/hbm.22539. Epub 2014 May 
13.

Hypoactivation in right inferior frontal cortex is specifically associated with 
motor response inhibition in adult ADHD.

Morein-Zamir S(1), Dodds C, van Hartevelt TJ, Schwarzkopf W, Sahakian B, Müller 
U, Robbins T.

Author information:
(1)Behavioural and Clinical Neuroscience Institute, University of Cambridge, 
Cambridge, United Kingdom; Department of Psychiatry, University of Cambridge, 
Cambridge, United Kingdom.

Adult ADHD has been linked to impaired motor response inhibition and reduced 
associated activation in the right inferior frontal cortex (IFC). However, it is 
unclear whether abnormal inferior frontal activation in adult ADHD is 
specifically related to a response inhibition deficit or reflects a more general 
deficit in attentional processing. Using functional magnetic resonance imaging, 
we tested a group of 19 ADHD patients with no comorbidities and a group of 19 
healthy control volunteers on a modified go/no-go task that has been shown 
previously to distinguish between cortical responses related to response 
inhibition and attentional shifting. Relative to the healthy controls, ADHD 
patients showed increased commission errors and reduced activation in inferior 
frontal cortex during response inhibition. Crucially, this reduced activation 
was observed when controlling for attentional processing, suggesting that 
hypoactivation in right IFC in ADHD is specifically related to impaired response 
inhibition. The results are consistent with the notion of a selective 
neurocognitive deficit in response inhibition in adult ADHD associated with 
abnormal functional activation in the prefrontal cortex, whilst ruling out 
likely group differences in attentional orienting, arousal and motivation.

Copyright © 2014 The Authors. Human Brain Mapping Published by Wiley 
Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/hbm.22539
PMCID: PMC4336557
PMID: 24819224 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


289. Neuroscience. 2014 Oct 10;278:51-61. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2014.07.076. 
Epub 2014 Aug 15.

Age-related increases in right frontal activation during task switching are 
mediated by reaction time and white matter microstructure.

Zhu Z(1), Hakun JG(2), Johnson NF(2), Gold BT(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology, University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY 
40536, USA. Electronic address: zude.zhu@uky.edu.
(2)Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology, University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY 
40536, USA.
(3)Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology, University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY 
40536, USA; Magnetic Resonance Imaging and Spectroscopy Center, University of 
Kentucky, Lexington, KY 40536, USA; Sanders-Brown Center on Aging, University of 
Kentucky, Lexington, KY 40536, USA. Electronic address: brian.gold@uky.edu.

Age-related increases in right frontal cortex activation are a common finding in 
the neuroimaging literature. However, neurocognitive factors contributing to 
right frontal over-recruitment remain poorly understood. Here we investigated 
the influence of age-related reaction time (RT) slowing and white matter (WM) 
microstructure reductions as potential explanatory factors for age-related 
increases in right frontal activation during task switching. Groups of younger 
(N=32) and older (N=33) participants completed a task switching paradigm while 
functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) was performed, and rested while 
diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) was performed. Two right frontal regions of 
interest (ROIs), the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC) and insula, were 
selected for further analyses from a common network of regions recruited by both 
age groups during task switching. Results demonstrated age-related activation 
increases in both ROIs. In addition, the older adult group showed longer RT and 
decreased fractional anisotropy in regions of the corpus callosum with direct 
connections to the fMRI ROIs. Subsequent mediation analyses indicated that 
age-related increases in right insula activation were mediated by RT slowing and 
age-related increases in right DLPFC activation were mediated by WM 
microstructure. Our results suggest that age-related RT slowing and WM 
microstructure declines contribute to age-related increases in right frontal 
activation during cognitive task performance.

Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2014.07.076
PMCID: PMC4194212
PMID: 25130561 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


290. Behav Brain Res. 2015 Oct 15;293:173-81. doi: 10.1016/j.bbr.2015.07.022. Epub 
2015 Jul 13.

A frontal attention mechanism in the visual mismatch negativity.

Hedge C(1), Stothart G(2), Todd Jones J(2), Rojas Frías P(2), Magee KL(2), 
Brooks JC(3).

Author information:
(1)School of Psychology, Cardiff University, UK; School of Experimental 
Psychology, University of Bristol, UK. Electronic address: HedgeC@cardiff.ac.uk.
(2)School of Experimental Psychology, University of Bristol, UK.
(3)School of Experimental Psychology, University of Bristol, UK; Clinical 
Research and Imaging Centre, University of Bristol, UK.

Automatic detection of environmental change is a core component of attention. 
The mismatch negativity (MMN), an electrophysiological marker of this mechanism, 
has been studied prominently in the auditory domain, with cortical generators 
identified in temporal and frontal regions. Here, we combined 
electroencephalography (EEG) and functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) to 
assess whether the underlying frontal regions associated with auditory change 
detection also play a role in visual change detection. Twenty healthy young 
adults completed a visual MMN task in separate EEG and fMRI sessions. Region of 
interest analyses were conducted on left and right middle frontal (MFG) and 
inferior frontal (IFG) gyri, i.e., the frontal areas identified as potential 
auditory MMN generators. A significant increase in activation was observed in 
the left IFG and MFG in response to blocks containing deviant stimuli. These 
findings suggest that a frontal mechanism is involved in the detection of change 
in the visual MMN. Our results support the notion that frontal mechanisms 
underlie attention switching, as measured via MMN, across multiple modalities.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbr.2015.07.022
PMCID: PMC4566935
PMID: 26183650 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


291. Neuroimage. 2020 Oct 15;220:117158. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2020.117158. Epub 
2020 Jul 11.

Flexible adjustment of the effective connectivity between the fronto-parietal 
and visual regions supports cognitive flexibility.

Qiao L(1), Xu M(2), Luo X(1), Zhang L(3), Li H(1), Chen A(4).

Author information:
(1)Shenzhen Key Laboratory of Affective and Social Cognitive Science, School of 
Psychology, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen, China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Cognition and Personality, Ministry of Education, Faculty 
of Psychology, Southwest University, Chongqing, China; School of Psychology, 
Shaanxi Normal University, Xi'an, China.
(3)Key Laboratory of Cognition and Personality, Ministry of Education, Faculty 
of Psychology, Southwest University, Chongqing, China.
(4)Key Laboratory of Cognition and Personality, Ministry of Education, Faculty 
of Psychology, Southwest University, Chongqing, China. Electronic address: 
xscat@swu.edu.cn.

Evidence indicates the significance of the fronto-parietal regions and inertia 
sensory processing from previous trials in cognitive flexibility. However, how 
flexible cognitive performance is achieved by causal interactions between 
cortical regions, particularly those between the fronto-parietal and stimulus 
processing regions, remains unknown. In the current study, the effective 
connectivity between the fronto-parietal and visual regions was examined in the 
context of a cued task-switching paradigm. We found that the fronto-parietal and 
visual cortex were differently activated during task transition (task repeat and 
task switch). Importantly, dynamic causal modeling (DCM) analysis revealed that 
task transition could modulate the effective connectivity between the 
fronto-parietal and visual cortex: task repeat decreased, while task switch 
enhanced, the coupling between the posterior parietal cortex (PPC) and the 
visual cortex. Furthermore, Granger causality analysis (GCA) showed that the 
dominant direction of influence was from the fronto-parietal regions to the 
visual cortex. Finally, individual differences in the top-down influence from 
the PPC to the visual cortex and the corresponding neural adjustment (task 
switch‒task repeat) was negatively associated with the behavioral switch cost. 
Our findings suggest that the interaction between the fronto-parietal and 
stimulus processing regions, particularly the top-down influence from the PPC to 
the visual cortex, is of particular importance in flexible cognitive 
performance.

Copyright © 2020 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2020.117158
PMID: 32659352 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare no financial interests or potential conflicts of interest.


292. Neurocase. 2002;8(3):219-25. doi: 10.1093/neucas/8.3.219.

Dissociation between attentional set shifting and habit learning: a longitudinal 
case study.

Kéri S(1), Beniczky S, Vörös E, Janka Z, Benedek G, Vécsei L.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of Szeged, Szeged, Hungary. 
szkeri@phys.szote.u-szeged.hu

We report a patient (ST) with predominant damage to the right neostriatum, 
caused by a rare cerebral angiitis. The testing procedure was focused on 
attentional set shifting (Wisconsin Card Sorting Test; WCST) and habit learning 
(probabilistic classification learning; PCL). ST showed impairments in the WCST, 
digit span backward, alphabet span, and PCL procedures, whereas he exhibited 
spared IQ, short-term verbal memory, object recognition, episodic and semantic 
memory. After 1 month of steroid therapy, there was a significant improvement in 
the WCST, digit span backward and alphabet span tests, whereas PCL remained 
severely impaired. The three control patients with damage to the parietal lobe 
displayed normal learning rates in PCL. These results suggest that separate 
frontostriatal mechanisms exist for attentional set shifting and habit learning.

DOI: 10.1093/neucas/8.3.219
PMID: 12119317 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


293. Neuropsychologia. 2014 Aug;61:175-89. doi: 
10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2014.06.022. Epub 2014 Jun 24.

Exploring adolescent cognitive control in a combined interference switching 
task.

Mennigen E(1), Rodehacke S(1), Müller KU(1), Ripke S(1), Goschke T(2), Smolka 
MN(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Neuroimaging Center, Technische Universität 
Dresden, Würzburger Str. 35, 01187 Dresden, Germany.
(2)Department of Psychology, Technische Universität Dresden, Dresden, Germany.
(3)Department of Psychiatry and Neuroimaging Center, Technische Universität 
Dresden, Würzburger Str. 35, 01187 Dresden, Germany. Electronic address: 
michael.smolka@tu-dresden.de.

Cognitive control enables individuals to flexibly adapt to environmental 
challenges. In the present functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) study, 
we investigated 185 adolescents at the age of 14 with a combined response 
interference switching task measuring behavioral responses (reaction time, RT 
and error rate, ER) and brain activity during the task. This task comprises two 
types of conflict which are co-occurring, namely, task switching and 
stimulus-response incongruence. Data indicated that already in adolescents an 
overlapping cognitive control network comprising the dorsal anterior cingulate 
cortex (dACC), dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC), pre-supplementary motor 
area (preSMA) and posterior parietal cortex (PPC) is recruited by conflicts 
arising from task switching and response incongruence. Furthermore our study 
revealed higher blood oxygenation level dependent (BOLD) responses elicited by 
incongruent stimuli in participants with a pronounced incongruence effect, 
calculated as the RT difference between incongruent and congruent trials. No 
such correlation was observed for switch costs. Furthermore, increased 
activation of the default mode network (DMN) was only observed in congruent 
trials compared to incongruent trials, but not in task repetition relative to 
task switch trials. These findings suggest that even though the two processes of 
task switching and response incongruence share a common cognitive control 
network they might be processed differentially within the cognitive control 
network. Results are discussed in the context of a novel hypothesis concerning 
antagonistic relations between the DMN and the cognitive control network.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2014.06.022
PMID: 24971708 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


294. Transl Psychiatry. 2020 Nov 12;10(1):399. doi: 10.1038/s41398-020-01084-x.

Key role for lipids in cognitive symptoms of schizophrenia.

Maas DA(1)(2)(3), Martens MB(4), Priovoulos N(5), Zuure WA(6), Homberg JR(7), 
Nait-Oumesmar B(8), Martens GJM(6)(4).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Science, Centre for Neuroscience, Department of Molecular Animal 
Physiology, Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behavior, Radboud 
University Nijmegen, Geert Grooteplein Zuid 26-28, 6525 GA, Nijmegen, The 
Netherlands. d.a.maas@outlook.com.
(2)Sorbonne Université, Paris Brain Institute - ICM, Inserm U1127, CNRS UMR 
7225, Hôpital Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris, France. d.a.maas@outlook.com.
(3)Department of Cognitive Neuroscience, Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition 
and Behavior, Donders Centre for Medical Neuroscience, Radboud University 
Medical Center, Kapittelweg 29, 6525 EN, Nijmegen, The Netherlands. 
d.a.maas@outlook.com.
(4)NeuroDrug Research Ltd, Toernooiveld 1, 6525 ED, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(5)Spinoza Centre for Neuroimaging, Meibergdreef 75, Amsterdam-Zuidoost, 1105 
BK, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(6)Faculty of Science, Centre for Neuroscience, Department of Molecular Animal 
Physiology, Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behavior, Radboud 
University Nijmegen, Geert Grooteplein Zuid 26-28, 6525 GA, Nijmegen, The 
Netherlands.
(7)Department of Cognitive Neuroscience, Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition 
and Behavior, Donders Centre for Medical Neuroscience, Radboud University 
Medical Center, Kapittelweg 29, 6525 EN, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(8)Sorbonne Université, Paris Brain Institute - ICM, Inserm U1127, CNRS UMR 
7225, Hôpital Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris, France.

Schizophrenia (SZ) is a psychiatric disorder with a convoluted etiology that 
includes cognitive symptoms, which arise from among others a dysfunctional 
dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (dlPFC). In our search for the molecular 
underpinnings of the cognitive deficits in SZ, we here performed RNA sequencing 
of gray matter from the dlPFC of SZ patients and controls. We found that the 
differentially expressed RNAs were enriched for mRNAs involved in the Liver X 
Receptor/Retinoid X Receptor (LXR/RXR) lipid metabolism pathway. Components of 
the LXR/RXR pathway were upregulated in gray matter but not in white matter of 
SZ dlPFC. Intriguingly, an analysis for shared genetic etiology, using two SZ 
genome-wide association studies (GWASs) and GWAS data for 514 metabolites, 
revealed genetic overlap between SZ and acylcarnitines, VLDL lipids, and fatty 
acid metabolites, which are all linked to the LXR/RXR signaling pathway. 
Furthermore, analysis of structural T1-weighted magnetic resonance imaging in 
combination with cognitive behavioral data showed that the lipid content of 
dlPFC gray matter is lower in SZ patients than in controls and correlates with a 
tendency towards reduced accuracy in the dlPFC-dependent task-switching test. We 
conclude that aberrations in LXR/RXR-regulated lipid metabolism lead to a 
decreased lipid content in SZ dlPFC that correlates with reduced cognitive 
performance.

DOI: 10.1038/s41398-020-01084-x
PMCID: PMC7665187
PMID: 33184259 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.


295. Neuroimage Clin. 2019;23:101852. doi: 10.1016/j.nicl.2019.101852. Epub 2019 May 
3.

The impact of white matter hyperintensities on the structural connectome in 
late-life depression: Relationship to executive functions.

Respino M(1), Jaywant A(2), Kuceyeski A(3), Victoria LW(1), Hoptman MJ(4), Scult 
MA(5), Sankin L(5), Pimontel M(5), Liston C(6), Belvederi Murri M(7), 
Alexopoulos GS(1), Gunning FM(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Weill Cornell Medicine, 525 E 68(th) St, New York, 
NY 10065, USA; Weill Cornell Institute of Geriatric Psychiatry, 21 Bloomingdale 
Road, White Plains, NY 10605, USA.
(2)Department of Psychiatry, Weill Cornell Medicine, 525 E 68(th) St, New York, 
NY 10065, USA; Department of Rehabilitation Medicine, Weill Cornell Medicine, 
525 E 68(th) St, New York, NY 10065, USA.
(3)Department of Radiology, Weill Cornell Medicine, 525 E 68(th) St, New York, 
NY 10065, USA.
(4)Clinical Research, Nathan Kline Institute, 140 Old Orangeburg Road, 
Orangeburg, NY 10962, USA; Department of Psychiatry, NYU School of Medicine, 550 
First Avenue, New York, NY 10016, USA.
(5)Department of Psychiatry, Weill Cornell Medicine, 525 E 68(th) St, New York, 
NY 10065, USA.
(6)Department of Psychiatry, Weill Cornell Medicine, 525 E 68(th) St, New York, 
NY 10065, USA; Feil Family Brain Mind Research Institute, Weill Cornell 
Medicine, 413 East 69(th) St, New York, NY 10021, USA.
(7)Department of Neuroscience, Ophthalmology, Genetics and Child-Maternal 
Science, University of Genoa, Corso Italia 22, 16145 Genova, Italy.
(8)Department of Psychiatry, Weill Cornell Medicine, 525 E 68(th) St, New York, 
NY 10065, USA; Weill Cornell Institute of Geriatric Psychiatry, 21 Bloomingdale 
Road, White Plains, NY 10605, USA. Electronic address: Fgd2002@med.cornell.edu.

BACKGROUND: White matter hyperintensities (WMH) represent ischemic white matter 
damage in late-life depression (LLD) and are associated with cognitive control 
dysfunction. Understanding the impact of WMH on the structural connectivity of 
gray matter and the cognitive control correlates of WMH-related structural 
dysconnectivity can provide insight into the pathophysiology of LLD.
METHODS: We compared WMH burden and performance on clinical measures of 
cognitive control in patients with LLD (N = 44) and a control group of 
non-depressed older adults (N = 59). We used the Network Modification (NeMo) 
Tool to investigate the impact of WMH on structural dysconnectivity in specific 
gray matter regions, and how such connectivity was related to cognitive control 
functions.
RESULTS: Compared to the control group, LLD participants had greater WMH burden, 
poorer performance on Trail Making Test (TMT) A & B, and greater self-reported 
dysexecutive behavior on the Frosntal Systems Behavior Scale-Executive Function 
subscale (FrSBe-EF). Within the LLD group, disrupted connectivity in the left 
supramarginal gyrus, paracentral lobule, thalamus, and pallidum was associated 
with psychomotor slowing (TMT-A). Altered connectivity in the left supramarginal 
gyrus, paracentral lobule, precentral gyrus, postcentral gyrus, thalamus, and 
pallidum was associated with poor attentional set-shifting (TMT-B). A follow-up 
analysis that isolated set-shifting ability (TMT-B/A ratio) confirmed the 
association with dysconnectivity in the bilateral paracentral lobule, right 
thalamus, left precentral gyrus, postcentral gyrus, and pallidum; additionally, 
it revealed associations with dysconnectivity in the right posterior cingulate, 
and left anterior cingulate, middle frontal cortex, and putamen.
CONCLUSIONS: In LLD, WMH are associated with region-specific disruptions in 
cortical and subcortical gray matter areas involved in attentional aspects of 
cognitive control systems and sensorimotor processing, which in turn are 
associated with slower processing speed, and reduced attentional set-shifting.
CLINICAL TRIALS REGISTRATION: https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT01728194.

Copyright © 2019. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.nicl.2019.101852
PMCID: PMC6514361
PMID: 31077981 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


296. Neurobiol Aging. 2010 Mar;31(3):512-22. doi: 
10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2008.04.005. Epub 2008 May 20.

Age-related slowing of task switching is associated with decreased integrity of 
frontoparietal white matter.

Gold BT(1), Powell DK, Xuan L, Jicha GA, Smith CD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology, Chandler Medical Center, University 
of Kentucky School of Medicine, Lexington, KY 40536-0298, USA. 
brian.gold@uky.edu

A body of research has demonstrated age-related slowing on tasks that emphasize 
cognitive control, such as task switching. However, little is known about the 
neural mechanisms that contribute to this age-related slowing. To address this 
issue, the present study used both fMRI and DTI in combination with a standard 
task switching paradigm. Results from the fMRI experiment demonstrated task 
switching cost (switching vs. nonswitching) activations in a network of 
frontoparietal and striatal regions in the young group. The older group 
recruited a similar network of regions, but showed decreased spatial extent of 
activation and recruited several regions not activated in the young group. White 
matter (WM) ROIs bordering the cortical network showing task switching 
activation were then selected to explore potential relationships between task 
switching reaction time (RT) cost and fractional anisotropy (FA) in the same 
groups of participants. Results demonstrated a negative correlation between 
switch cost RT and FA in left frontoparietal WM in both young and older groups. 
In addition, age-related FA decline in the same frontoparietal WM region was 
found to mediate age-related increases in RT switch costs. These findings 
identify decreased integrity of frontoparietal WM as one mechanism contributing 
to age-related increases in RT switch costs.

Copyright 2008 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2008.04.005
PMCID: PMC2815097
PMID: 18495298 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest The authors have no actual 
or potential conflicts of interest associated with this research.


297. Cogn Affect Behav Neurosci. 2011 Sep;11(3):292-308. doi: 
10.3758/s13415-011-0037-y.

"Smart inhibition": electrophysiological evidence for the suppression of 
conflict-generating task rules during task switching.

Meiran N(1), Hsieh S, Chang CC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Zlotowsky Center for Neuroscience, Ben-Gurion 
University of the Negev, Beer-Sheva, Israel. nmeiran@bgu.ac.il

A major challenge for task switching is maintaining a balance between high task 
readiness and effectively ignoring irrelevant task rules. This calls for finely 
tuned inhibition that targets only the source of interference without adversely 
influencing other task-related representations. The authors show that irrelevant 
task rules generating response conflict are inhibited, causing their inefficient 
execution on the next trial (indicating the presence of competitor rule 
suppression[CRS];Meiran, Hsieh, & Dimov, Journal of Experimental Psychology: 
Learning, Memory and Cognition, 36, 992-1002, 2010). To determine whether CRS 
influences task rules, rather than target stimuli or responses, the authors 
focused on the processing of the task cue before the target stimulus was 
presented and before the response could be chosen. As was predicted, CRS was 
found in the event-related potentials in two time windows during task cue 
processing. It was also found in three time windows after target presentation. 
Source localization analyses suggest the involvement of the right dorsal 
prefrontal cortex in all five time windows.

DOI: 10.3758/s13415-011-0037-y
PMID: 21590505 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


298. Neuropsychologia. 2025 Sep 9;216:109188. doi: 
10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2025.109188. Epub 2025 May 30.

The optimisation of functional brain network dynamics when learning to perform 
complex tasks.

Parkin BL(1), Daws RE(2), Scott G(3), Soreq E(3), Leech R(4), Hellyer PJ(4), 
Hampshire A(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, School of Social Sciences, University of 
Westminster, London, UK. Electronic address: b.parkin@westminster.ac.uk.
(2)Department of Neuroimaging, Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology and 
Neurosciences, King's College London, London, UK; Department of Brain Sciences, 
Imperial College London, UK.
(3)Department of Brain Sciences, Imperial College London, UK.
(4)Department of Neuroimaging, Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology and 
Neurosciences, King's College London, London, UK.
(5)Department of Neuroimaging, Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology and 
Neurosciences, King's College London, London, UK; Department of Brain Sciences, 
Imperial College London, UK. Electronic address: adam.hampshire@kcl.ac.uk.

We present two novel self-ordered switching (SOS) fMRI paradigms designed to 
investigate how brain networks facilitate the establishment of structured human 
behaviour during the learning of complex tasks with multiple goals. In study 1, 
SOS was performed with minimal pretraining and detailed feedback to capture the 
learning process, while in study 2 substantial pretraining and minimal feedback 
were used as a control where the potential for ongoing optimisation of behaviour 
is reduced. Study 1 revealed changes in the learning process characterised by a 
decrease in task-switching frequency, resulting in superior task performance for 
individuals who minimised switch frequency and ordered their behaviour in simple 
structured routines. Additionally, with practice, multiple-demand cortex 
activation became less responsive, and the default mode network became more 
responsive when performing discrimination trials. Strikingly, the opposite 
pattern was observed for SOS events, with multiple-demand cortex activation 
becoming more responsive and default mode network activation becoming less 
responsive with practice. These neural changes correlated with the degree of 
structure of behavioural routines. The neural signatures of learning were less 
evident in study 2, where the task was practiced prior to entering the scanner. 
Our studies demonstrate that the default mode network and multiple demand cortex 
complement each other when people learn to perform complex tasks by becoming 
differentially fine-tuned to routine trial demands vs. executive-switching 
demands.

Copyright © 2025. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2025.109188
PMID: 40451327 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
have no conflict of interest to declare.


299. Hum Brain Mapp. 2004 Apr;21(4):279-97. doi: 10.1002/hbm.20003.

Don't think of a white bear: an fMRI investigation of the effects of sequential 
instructional sets on cortical activity in a task-switching paradigm.

Wylie GR(1), Javitt DC, Foxe JJ.

Author information:
(1)Cognitive Neurophysiology Laboratory, Program in Cognitive Neuroscience and 
Schizophrenia, Nathan S Kline Institute for Psychiatric Research, Orangeburg, 
New York 10962, USA. wylie@nki.rfmh.org

Using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), we investigated processes 
involved in switching between two ongoing tasks, thought to be paradigmatic of 
executive control processes. Subjects were considerably slower and less accurate 
when switching between two tasks than when repeatedly carrying out one task, 
so-called "switch costs." Switch costs, however, generally occur only when more 
than one task is associated with each stimulus type. This has led to the surmise 
that switch costs may be due largely to ongoing interference from previously 
learned stimulus-response (S-R) associations, which are no longer relevant for 
the task at hand. We used a paradigm that specifically assessed this hypothesis 
and investigated three stages. In Stage 1, a single task was carried out with 
each stimulus type; in Stage 2, a second novel task was introduced for each 
stimulus type; and in Stage 3, subjects reverted to carrying out solely the 
original tasks (as in Stage 1). In Stage 1, only one task was associated with 
each stimulus type, whereas two tasks were associated with each stimulus type in 
Stages 2 and 3. We compared images obtained during Stage 3 to those obtained 
during Stage 1 and show that during Stage 3, there was robust activation in the 
network of areas associated with the Stage 2 tasks, even though these tasks were 
no longer relevant. Our data strongly suggest that switch costs may derive 
largely from continued activation of areas associated with carrying out the 
now-irrelevant task(s). We posit that a large component of executive control 
processes involves resolution of competition between potentially relevant tasks. 
Our data also revealed widespread activation of a frontoparietal network of 
areas, and we discuss how this network might be involved in mediating this 
competition.

Copyright 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/hbm.20003
PMCID: PMC6871849
PMID: 15038009 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


300. Cereb Cortex. 2022 Apr 20;32(9):1965-1977. doi: 10.1093/cercor/bhab328.

Functional Organization of Frontoparietal Cortex in the Marmoset Investigated 
with Awake Resting-State fMRI.

Hori Y(1), Cléry JC(1), Schaeffer DJ(2), Menon RS(1), Everling S(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Functional and Metabolic Mapping, Robarts Research Institute, The 
University of Western Ontario, London, Ontario N6A 5B7, Canada.
(2)Department of Neurobiology, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15261, 
USA.
(3)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, The University of Western Ontario, 
London, Ontario N6A 5C1, Canada.

Frontoparietal networks contribute to complex cognitive functions in humans and 
macaques, such as working memory, attention, task-switching, response 
suppression, grasping, reaching, and eye movement control. However, there has 
been no comprehensive examination of the functional organization of 
frontoparietal networks using functional magnetic resonance imaging in the New 
World common marmoset monkey (Callithrix jacchus), which is now widely 
recognized as a powerful nonhuman primate experimental animal. In this study, we 
employed hierarchical clustering of interareal blood oxygen level-dependent 
signals to investigate the hypothesis that the organization of the 
frontoparietal cortex in the marmoset follows the organizational principles of 
the macaque frontoparietal system. We found that the posterior part of the 
lateral frontal cortex (premotor regions) was functionally connected to the 
anterior parietal areas, while more anterior frontal regions (frontal eye field 
[FEF]) were connected to more posterior parietal areas (the region around the 
lateral intraparietal area [LIP]). These overarching patterns of interareal 
organization are consistent with a recent macaque study. These findings 
demonstrate parallel frontoparietal processing streams in marmosets and support 
the functional similarities of FEF-LIP and premotor-anterior parietal pathways 
between marmoset and macaque.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. 
For permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/cercor/bhab328
PMCID: PMC9070335
PMID: 34515315 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


301. Neuropsychologia. 2019 Mar 4;125:109-115. doi: 
10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2019.01.016. Epub 2019 Feb 2.

Boosting the effect of reward on cognitive control using TMS over the left IFJ.

Hippmann B(1), Kuhlemann I(2), Bäumer T(3), Bahlmann J(4), Münte TF(4), Jessen 
S(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Lübeck, D-23538 Lübeck, Germany. 
Electronic address: bernadette.hippmann@neuro.uni-luebeck.de.
(2)Institute for Robotics and Cognitive Systems, University of Lübeck, D-23538 
Lübeck, Germany.
(3)Institute of Neurogenetics, University of Lübeck, D-23538 Lübeck, Germany.
(4)Department of Neurology, University of Lübeck, D-23538 Lübeck, Germany.

Although an enhancing effect of reward on cognitive performance has been 
observed consistently, its neural underpinnings remain elusive. Recent evidence 
suggests that the inferior frontal junction (IFJ) may be a key player underlying 
such an enhancement by integrating motivational processes and cognitive control. 
However, its exact role and in particular a potential causality of IFJ 
activation is still unclear. In the present study, we therefore investigated the 
causal contributions of the left IFJ in motivated task switching by temporarily 
disrupting its activity using continuous theta burst stimulation (cTBS, Exp.1) 
or 1 Hz repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS, Exp.2). After TMS 
application over the left IFJ or a control site (vertex), participants performed 
a switch task in which numbers had to be judged by magnitude or parity. 
Different amounts of monetary rewards (high vs low) were used to manipulate the 
participants' motivational states. We measured reaction times and error rates. 
Irrespective of TMS stimulation, participants exhibited slower responses 
following task switches compared to task repeats. This effect was reduced in 
high reward trials. Importantly, we found that disrupting the IFJ improved 
participants' behavioral performance in the high reward condition. For high 
reward trials exclusively, error rates decreased when the IFJ was modulated with 
cTBS or 1 Hz rTMS but not after vertex stimulation. Our results suggest that the 
left IFJ is causally related to the increase in cognitive performance through 
reward.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2019.01.016
PMID: 30721740 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


302. Brain. 1997 Jul;120 ( Pt 7):1229-44. doi: 10.1093/brain/120.7.1229.

Spatial- and object-based attentional deficits in Alzheimer's disease. 
Relationship to HMPAO-SPECT measures of parietal perfusion.

Buck BH(1), Black SE, Behrmann M, Caldwell C, Bronskill MJ.

Author information:
(1)Research Program in Aging (Sunnybrook Health Science Centre), North York, ON, 
Canada.

The purpose of this study was to investigate the ability of patients with 
Alzheimer's disease to shift attention between spatial locations and between 
objects, and to examine the brain regions involved in these cognitive operations 
using single photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) imaging. A recent study 
of patients with focal lesions provided evidence that the right and left 
parietal lobes are differentially involved in shifting selective attention from 
invalidly cued spatial locations and objects, respectively (Egly et al. J Exp 
Psychol Gen 1994; 123: 161-77). Accordingly, in Alzheimer's disease patients, we 
hypothesized that right parietal hypoperfusion on SPECT would be associated with 
deficits on the spatial-based component of a cued reaction time task, and left 
parietal hypoperfusion would be associated with the deficits on the object-based 
component. Attentional performance of Alzheimer's disease patients (n = 29) was 
compared with aged-matched normal controls (n = 17) using a cued reaction time 
task based on Egly et. al. (1994). Regions of interest were defined 
semi-automatically on SPECT, and were anatomically localized with the aid of 
co-registered MRI. As hypothesized, in Alzheimer's disease patients, reaction 
time costs of invalid targets eliciting shifts of attention between spatial 
locations were selectively correlated with SPECT hypoperfusion in the right 
superior parietal lobe; while reaction time costs of between-object shifts of 
attention were correlated with hypoperfusion in the left inferior parietal lobe. 
These results provide evidence for the specialized roles of the right and left 
parietal regions in the spatial and object components of attentional shifting 
respectively, and suggest that the cognitive profile associated with Alzheimer's 
disease includes both spatial- and object-based attentional impairments.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/120.7.1229
PMID: 9236633 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


303. Biol Psychiatry. 2017 Apr 15;81(8):708-717. doi: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2016.08.009. 
Epub 2016 Aug 11.

Specific Frontostriatal Circuits for Impaired Cognitive Flexibility and 
Goal-Directed Planning in Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder: Evidence From 
Resting-State Functional Connectivity.

Vaghi MM(1), Vértes PE(2), Kitzbichler MG(2), Apergis-Schoute AM(3), van der 
Flier FE(4), Fineberg NA(5), Sule A(6), Zaman R(7), Voon V(3), Kundu P(8), 
Bullmore ET(2), Robbins TW(9).

Author information:
(1)Departments of Psychology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge; Behavioural 
and Clinical Neurosciences Institute, University of Cambridge, Cambridge. 
Electronic address: matilde.vaghi@gmail.com.
(2)Psychiatry, University of Cambridge, Cambridge; Brain Mapping Unit, 
University of Cambridge, Cambridge.
(3)Psychiatry, University of Cambridge, Cambridge; Behavioural and Clinical 
Neurosciences Institute, University of Cambridge, Cambridge.
(4)Behavioural and Clinical Neurosciences Institute, University of Cambridge, 
Cambridge.
(5)Hertfordshire Partnership University National Health Service Foundation 
Trust, Hertfordshir; University of Hertfordshire, Hertfordshire.
(6)Cumbria Partnership National Health Service Foundation Trust, National Health 
Service, Penrith, Cumbria, United Kingdom.
(7)Psychiatry, University of Cambridge, Cambridge.
(8)Brain Imaging Center and Translational, Icahn Institute of Medicine at Mt. 
Sinai, New York, New York; Molecular Imaging Institute, Icahn Institute of 
Medicine at Mt. Sinai, New York, New York.
(9)Departments of Psychology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge; Behavioural 
and Clinical Neurosciences Institute, University of Cambridge, Cambridge.

BACKGROUND: A recent hypothesis has suggested that core deficits in 
goal-directed behavior in obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) are caused by 
impaired frontostriatal function. We tested this hypothesis in OCD patients and 
control subjects by relating measures of goal-directed planning and cognitive 
flexibility to underlying resting-state functional connectivity.
METHODS: Multiecho resting-state acquisition, combined with micromovement 
correction by blood oxygen level-dependent sensitive independent component 
analysis, was used to obtain in vivo measures of functional connectivity in 44 
OCD patients and 43 healthy comparison subjects. We measured cognitive 
flexibility (attentional set-shifting) and goal-directed performance (planning 
of sequential response sequences) by means of well-validated, standardized 
behavioral cognitive paradigms. Functional connectivity strength of striatal 
seed regions was related to cognitive flexibility and goal-directed performance. 
To gain insights into fundamental network alterations, graph theoretical models 
of brain networks were derived.
RESULTS: Reduced functional connectivity between the caudate and the 
ventrolateral prefrontal cortex was selectively associated with reduced 
cognitive flexibility. In contrast, goal-directed performance was selectively 
related to reduced functional connectivity between the putamen and the 
dorsolateral prefrontal cortex in OCD patients, as well as to symptom severity. 
Whole-brain data-driven graph theoretical analysis disclosed that striatal 
regions constitute a cohesive module of the community structure of the 
functional connectome in OCD patients as nodes within the basal ganglia and 
cerebellum were more strongly connected to one another than in healthy control 
subjects.
CONCLUSIONS: These data extend major neuropsychological models of OCD by 
providing a direct link between intrinsically abnormal functional connectivity 
within dissociable frontostriatal circuits and those cognitive processes 
underlying OCD symptoms.

Copyright © 2016 Society of Biological Psychiatry. Published by Elsevier Inc. 
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2016.08.009
PMCID: PMC6020061
PMID: 27769568 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


304. Cereb Cortex. 2009 Jul;19(7):1557-66. doi: 10.1093/cercor/bhn189. Epub 2008 Nov 
2.

The contributions of prefrontal cortex and executive control to deception: 
evidence from activation likelihood estimate meta-analyses.

Christ SE(1), Van Essen DC, Watson JM, Brubaker LE, McDermott KB.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychological Sciences, University of Missouri, Columbia, MO 
65203, USA. christse@missouri.edu

Previous neuroimaging studies have implicated the prefrontal cortex (PFC) and 
nearby brain regions in deception. This is consistent with the hypothesis that 
lying involves the executive control system. To date, the nature of the 
contribution of different aspects of executive control to deception, however, 
remains unclear. In the present study, we utilized an activation likelihood 
estimate (ALE) method of meta-analysis to quantitatively identify brain regions 
that are consistently more active for deceptive responses relative to truthful 
responses across past studies. We then contrasted the results with additional 
ALE maps generated for 3 different aspects of executive control: working memory, 
inhibitory control, and task switching. Deception-related regions in 
dorsolateral PFC and posterior parietal cortex were selectively associated with 
working memory. Additional deception regions in ventrolateral PFC, anterior 
insula, and anterior cingulate cortex were associated with multiple aspects of 
executive control. In contrast, deception-related regions in bilateral inferior 
parietal lobule were not associated with any of the 3 executive control 
constructs. Our findings support the notion that executive control processes, 
particularly working memory, and their associated neural substrates play an 
integral role in deception. This work provides a foundation for future research 
on the neurocognitive basis of deception.

DOI: 10.1093/cercor/bhn189
PMCID: PMC2693617
PMID: 18980948 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


305. Neuron. 2006 May 18;50(4):643-53. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2006.04.015.

Anterior cingulate and posterior parietal cortices are sensitive to dissociable 
forms of conflict in a task-switching paradigm.

Liston C(1), Matalon S, Hare TA, Davidson MC, Casey BJ.

Author information:
(1)Sackler Institute for Developmental Psychobiology, Weill Medical College of 
Cornell University, 1300 York Avenue, Box 140, New York, New York 10021, USA. 
col2004@med.cornell.edu

The conflict-monitoring hypothesis posits that anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) 
monitors conflict in information processing and recruits dorsolateral prefrontal 
cortex (DLPFC) to resolve competition as needed. We used fMRI to test this 
prediction directly in the context of a task-switching paradigm, in which 
subjects responded to the color or the motion of a visual stimulus. Conflict was 
indexed in terms of the product of activities in areas specialized for color or 
motion processing on a trial-by-trial basis. Here, we report that ACC and 
posterior parietal cortex (PPC) were sensitive to distinct forms of conflict, at 
the level of the response and the stimulus representation, respectively. 
Activity in PPC preceded increased activity in DLPFC and predicted enhanced 
behavioral performance on subsequent trials. These findings suggest that ACC and 
PPC may act in concert to detect dissociable forms of conflict and signal to 
DLPFC the need for increased control.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuron.2006.04.015
PMID: 16701213 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


306. J Neurophysiol. 2016 Dec 1;116(6):2637-2646. doi: 10.1152/jn.00565.2016. Epub 
2016 Sep 21.

Dissociable roles of preSMA in motor sequence chunking and hand switching-a TMS 
study.

Muessgens D(1), Thirugnanasambandam N(2), Shitara H(2), Popa T(2), Hallett M(2).

Author information:
(1)Human Motor Control Section, National Institute of Neurological Disorders and 
Stroke, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 
diana.muessgens@nih.gov.
(2)Human Motor Control Section, National Institute of Neurological Disorders and 
Stroke, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland.

Motor chunking, the grouping of individual movements into larger units, is 
crucial for sequential motor performance. The presupplementary motor area 
(preSMA) is involved in chunking and other related processes such as task 
switching, response selection, and response inhibition that are crucial for 
organizing sequential movements. However, previous studies have not 
systematically differentiated the role of preSMA in motor chunking and hand 
switching, thus leaving its relative contribution to each of these processes 
unclear. The aim of this study is to demonstrate the differential role of preSMA 
in motor chunking and hand switching. We designed motor sequences in which 
different kinds of hand switches (switching toward the right or left hand or 
continuing with the right hand) were counterbalanced across between- and 
within-chunk sequence points. Eighteen healthy, right-handed participants 
practiced four short subsequences (chunks) of key presses. In a subsequent task, 
these chunks had to be concatenated into one long sequence. We applied 
double-pulse transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) over left preSMA or left M1 
areas at sequence initiation, between chunks, or within chunks. TMS over the 
left preSMA significantly slowed the next response when stimulation was given 
between chunks, but only if a hand switch toward the contralateral (right) hand 
was required. PreSMA stimulation within chunks did not interfere with responses. 
TMS over the left M1 area delayed responses with the contralateral hand, both 
within and between chunks. Both preSMA and M1 stimulation decreased response 
times at sequence initiation. These results suggest that left preSMA is not 
necessary for chunking per se, but rather for organizing complex movements that 
require chunking and hand switching simultaneously.

DOI: 10.1152/jn.00565.2016
PMCID: PMC5133291
PMID: 27655967 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


307. Psychiatry Res. 2019 Jun;276:232-238. doi: 10.1016/j.psychres.2019.05.003. Epub 
2019 May 2.

Developing neurocognitive standard clinical care: A study of young adult 
inpatients.

Tickell AM(1), Scott EM(2), Davenport T(3), Iorfino F(3), Ospina-Pinillos L(3), 
White D(3), Harel K(2), Parker L(2), Hickie IB(3), Hermens DF(4).

Author information:
(1)Clinical Research Unit, Brain and Mind Centre, University of Sydney, 100 
Mallett Street, Camperdown, NSW 2050, Australia. Electronic address: 
ashleigh.tickell@sydney.edu.au.
(2)Young Adult Mental Health Unit, Uspace, St Vincent's Private Hospital, 
Australia.
(3)Clinical Research Unit, Brain and Mind Centre, University of Sydney, 100 
Mallett Street, Camperdown, NSW 2050, Australia.
(4)Clinical Research Unit, Brain and Mind Centre, University of Sydney, 100 
Mallett Street, Camperdown, NSW 2050, Australia; Sunshine Coast Mind and 
Neuroscience Thompson Institute, University of the Sunshine Coast, Birtinya, 
QLD, Australia.

Neuropsychological assessments have provided the field of psychiatry with 
important information about patients. As an assessment tool, a 
neuropsychological battery can be useful in a clinical setting; however, 
implementation as standard clinical care in an inpatient unit has not been 
extensively evaluated. A computerized cognitive battery was administered to 103 
current young adult inpatients (19.2 ± 3.1 years; 72% female) with affective 
disorder. Neurocognitive tasks included Verbal Recognition Memory (VRM), 
Attention Switching (AST), Paired Association Learning (PAL), and Rapid Visual 
Processing (RVP). Patients also completed a computerized self-report 
questionnaire evaluating subjective impressions of their cognition. Hierarchical 
cluster analysis determined three neurocognitive subgroups: cluster 1 (n = 17) 
showed a more impaired neurocognitive profile on three of the four variables 
compared to their peers in cluster 2 (n = 59), and cluster 3 (n = 27), who had 
the most impaired attentional shifting. Two of the four neurocognitive variables 
were significantly different between all three cluster groups (verbal learning 
and sustained attention). Overall group results showed an association between 
poorer sustained attention and increased suicidal ideation. These findings 
strengthen the idea that neurocognitive profiles may play an important role in 
better understanding the severity of illness in young inpatients with major 
psychiatric disorders.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.psychres.2019.05.003
PMID: 31121529 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


308. Hum Brain Mapp. 2011 Jul;32(7):1036-49. doi: 10.1002/hbm.21087. Epub 2010 Jul 
27.

Dynamic upper and lower visual field preferences within the human dorsal 
frontoparietal attention network.

Kraft A(1), Sommer WH, Schmidt S, Brandt SA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Charité, Berlin Neuroimaging Center, Berlin, 
Germany.

Both in nonhuman primates and in humans, behavioral differences between the 
upper and lower visual field have been identified in distinct subprocesses of 
attention. Advantages of the lower field have been explained by its higher 
spatial resolution; those of the upper field by its higher efficiency in 
attentional shifting. The physiological basis of visual field asymmetries within 
in the frontoparietal attention network (FPN) remains unclear. This study 
investigates the physiological correlates of upper and lower field preferences 
within the FPN using event-related functional magnetic resonance imaging. The 
paradigm separated two attentional subprocesses during a visual search task. 
Whether in the upper or lower field, the attention of subjects was first 
directed at stationary locations (spatial orienting) and then shifted between 
locations to search for a target (visual search) in easy or difficult search 
displays. Depending on the task phase (spatial orienting vs. easy visual 
search), upper and lower visual field preferences in the FPN changed. The 
analysis revealed a lower field preference during stationary spatial orienting 
and an upper field preference during visual search. We conclude that also higher 
areas represent upper and lower visual field asymmetries depending on distinct 
subcomponents of visuospatial attentional processing.

Copyright © 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/hbm.21087
PMCID: PMC6870500
PMID: 20665723 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


309. Cogn Affect Behav Neurosci. 2021 Aug;21(4):717-735. doi: 
10.3758/s13415-021-00882-0. Epub 2021 Apr 6.

The impact of training methodology and representation on rule-based 
categorization: An fMRI study.

Hélie S(1), Shamloo F(2), Zhang H(3), Ell SW(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychological Sciences, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN, 
USA. shelie@purdue.edu.
(2)Department of Psychological Sciences, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN, 
USA.
(3)Department of Psychology, Colorado State University, Fort Collins, CO, USA.
(4)Department of Psychology, University of Maine, Orono, ME, USA.

Hélie, Shamloo, & Ell (2017) showed that regular classification learning 
instructions (A/B) promote between-category knowledge in rule-based 
categorization whereas conceptual learning instructions (YES/NO) promote 
learning within-category knowledge with the same categories. Here we explore how 
these tasks affect brain activity using fMRI. Participants learned two sets of 
two categories. Computational models were fit to the behavioral data to 
determine the type of knowledge learned by each participant. fMRI contrasts were 
computed to compare BOLD signal between the tasks and between the types of 
knowledge. The results show that participants in the YES/NO task had more 
activity in the pre-supplementary motor area, prefrontal cortex, and the 
angular/supramarginal gyrus. These brain areas are related to working memory and 
part of the dorsal attention network, which showed increased task-based 
functional connectivity with the medial temporal lobes. In contrast, 
participants in the A/B task had more activity in the thalamus and caudate. 
These results suggest that participants in the YES/NO task used bivalent rules 
and may have treated each contextual question as a separate task, switching task 
each time the question changed. Activity in the A/B condition was more 
consistent with participants applying direct Stimulus → Response rules. With 
regards to knowledge representation, there was a large shared network of brain 
areas, but participants learning between-category information showed additional 
posterior parietal activity, which may be related to the inhibition of incorrect 
motor programs.

© 2021. The Psychonomic Society, Inc.

DOI: 10.3758/s13415-021-00882-0
PMID: 33825123 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


310. PLoS One. 2014 Feb 18;9(2):e88957. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0088957. 
eCollection 2014.

Interindividual differences in mid-adolescents in error monitoring and 
post-error adjustment.

Rodehacke S(1), Mennigen E(1), Müller KU(1), Ripke S(1), Jacob MJ(1), Hübner 
T(1), Schmidt DH(1), Goschke T(2), Smolka MN(1).

Author information:
(1)Neuroimaging Center, Technische Universität Dresden, Dresden, Germany ; 
Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, Technische Universität Dresden, 
Dresden, Germany.
(2)Institute of General Psychology, Biopsychology and Methods of Psychology, 
Department of Psychology, Technische Universität Dresden, Dresden, Germany.

A number of studies have concluded that cognitive control is not fully 
established until late adolescence. The precise differences in brain function 
between adults and adolescents with respect to cognitive control, however, 
remain unclear. To address this issue, we conducted a study in which 185 
adolescents (mean age (SD) 14.6 (0.3) years) and 28 adults (mean age (SD) 25.2 
(6.3) years) performed a single task that included both a stimulus-response 
(S-R) interference component and a task-switching component. Behavioural 
responses (i.e. reaction time, RT; error rate, ER) and brain activity during 
correct, error and post-error trials, detected by functional magnetic resonance 
imaging (fMRI), were measured. Behaviourally, RT and ER were significantly 
higher in incongruent than in congruent trials and in switch than in repeat 
trials. The two groups did not differ in RT during correct trials, but 
adolescents had a significantly higher ER than adults. In line with similar RTs, 
brain responses during correct trials did not differ between groups, indicating 
that adolescents and adults engage the same cognitive control network to 
successfully overcome S-R interference or task switches. Interestingly, 
adolescents with stronger brain activation in the bilateral insulae during error 
trials and in fronto-parietal regions of the cognitive control network during 
post-error trials did have lower ERs. This indicates that those mid-adolescents 
who commit fewer errors are better at monitoring their performance, and after 
detecting errors are more capable of flexibly allocating further cognitive 
control resources. Although we did not detect a convincing neural correlate of 
the observed behavioural differences between adolescents and adults, the 
revealed interindividual differences in adolescents might at least in part be 
due to brain development.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0088957
PMCID: PMC3928333
PMID: 24558455 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.


311. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2021 Feb;92(2):143-149. doi: 
10.1136/jnnp-2020-324104. Epub 2020 Oct 31.

Fronto-striatal circuits for cognitive flexibility in far from onset 
Huntington's disease: evidence from the Young Adult Study.

Langley C(1), Gregory S(2), Osborne-Crowley K(2)(3), O'Callaghan C(4)(5), Zeun 
P(2), Lowe J(2), Johnson EB(2), Papoutsi M(2), Scahill RI(2), Rees G(6), Tabrizi 
SJ(2), Robbins TW(7), Sahakian BJ(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK 
cl798@medschl.cam.ac.uk.
(2)Huntington's Disease Centre, Department of Neurodegenerative disease, 
Institute of Neurology, University College London, London, UK.
(3)Division of Equity, Diversity and Inclusion, University of New South Wales, 
Sydney, New South Wales, Australia.
(4)Department of Psychiatry, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.
(5)Brain and Mind Centre, Faculty of Medicine and Health, The University of 
Sydney, Sydney, New South Wales, Australia.
(6)University College London Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience, UCL, London, 
UK.
(7)Department of Psychology and Behavioural and Clinical Neuroscience Institute, 
University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.

Comment in
    J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2021 Feb;92(2):120-121. doi: 
10.1136/jnnp-2020-324678.

OBJECTIVES: Cognitive flexibility, which is key for adaptive decision-making, 
engages prefrontal cortex (PFC)-striatal circuitry and is impaired in both 
manifest and premanifest Huntington's disease (pre-HD). The aim of this study 
was to examine cognitive flexibility in a far from onset pre-HD cohort to 
determine whether an early impairment exists and if so, whether fronto-striatal 
circuits were associated with this deficit.
METHODS: In the present study, we examined performance of 51 pre-HD participants 
(mean age=29.22 (SD=5.71) years) from the HD Young Adult Study cohort and 53 
controls matched for age, sex and IQ, on the Cambridge Neuropsychological Test 
Automated Battery (CANTAB) Intra-Extra Dimensional Set-Shift (IED) task. This 
cohort is unique as it is the furthest from disease onset comprehensively 
studied to date (mean years=23.89 (SD=5.96) years). The IED task measures visual 
discrimination learning, cognitive flexibility and specifically attentional 
set-shifting. We used resting-state functional MRI to examine whether the 
functional connectivity between specific fronto-striatal circuits was 
dysfunctional in pre-HD, compared with controls, and whether these circuits were 
associated with performance on the critical extradimensional shift stage.
RESULTS: Our results demonstrated that the CANTAB IED task detects a mild early 
impairment in cognitive flexibility in a pre-HD group far from onset. 
Attentional set-shifting was significantly related to functional connectivity 
between the ventrolateral PFC and ventral striatum in healthy controls and to 
functional connectivity between the dorsolateral PFC and caudate in pre-HD 
participants.
CONCLUSION: We postulate that this incipient impairment of cognitive flexibility 
may be associated with intrinsically abnormal functional connectivity of 
fronto-striatal circuitry in pre-HD.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2021. Re-use permitted under CC BY. Published 
by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/jnnp-2020-324104
PMCID: PMC7841479
PMID: 33130575 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: CL, SG, KOC, CO’C, PZ, JL, 
EBJ, MP, RS, GR and SJT have no competing interests. TWR and BJS consult for 
Cambridge Cognition.


312. PLoS One. 2013 Apr 24;8(4):e59600. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0059600. Print 
2013.

Cognitive inflexibility in obsessive-compulsive disorder and major depression is 
associated with distinct neural correlates.

Remijnse PL(1), van den Heuvel OA, Nielen MM, Vriend C, Hendriks GJ, Hoogendijk 
WJ, Uylings HB, Veltman DJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The 
Netherlands.

Obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) and major depressive disorder (MDD) are 
frequently co-morbid, and dysfunctional frontal-striatal circuits have been 
implicated in both disorders. Neurobiological distinctions between OCD and MDD 
are insufficiently clear, and comparative neuroimaging studies are extremely 
scarce. OCD and MDD may be characterized by cognitive rigidity at the phenotype 
level, and frontal-striatal brain circuits constitute the neural substrate of 
intact cognitive flexibility. In the present study, 18 non-medicated MDD-free 
patients with OCD, 19 non-medicated OCD-free patients with MDD, and 29 matched 
healthy controls underwent functional magnetic resonance imaging during 
performance of a self-paced letter/digit task switching paradigm. Results showed 
that both patient groups responded slower relative to controls during repeat 
events, but only in OCD patients slowing was associated with decreased error 
rates. During switching, patients with OCD showed increased activation of the 
putamen, anterior cingulate and insula, whereas MDD patients recruited inferior 
parietal cortex and precuneus to a lesser extent. Patients with OCD and MDD 
commonly failed to reveal anterior prefrontal cortex activation during 
switching. This study shows subtle behavioral abnormalities on a measure of 
cognitive flexibility in MDD and OCD, associated with differential 
frontal-striatal brain dysfunction in both disorders. These findings may add to 
the development of biological markers that more precisely characterize 
frequently co-morbid neuropsychiatric disorders such as OCD and MDD.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0059600
PMCID: PMC3634812
PMID: 23637737 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.


313. Brain Res Brain Res Protoc. 2003 Mar;11(1):27-37. doi: 
10.1016/s1385-299x(03)00013-8.

The Madrid card sorting test (MCST): a task switching paradigm to study 
executive attention with event-related potentials.

Barceló F(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of the Balearic Islands, Ctra. 
Valldemossa km 7.5, 07071 Palma de Mallorca, Spain. f.barcelo@uib.es

Event-related potentials (ERPs) provide valuable information about the fast 
brain dynamics subserving cognitive functions such as attention and working 
memory. Most ERP studies employ cognitive paradigms with a fixed task-set (i.e., 
press a button to coloured targets), but few have measured ERPs time-locked to 
shifts in set using a task-switching paradigm. The Madrid card sorting test 
(MCST) is a dual task protocol in which feedback cues signal unpredictable 
shifts in set (i.e., from 'sort cards by colour' to 'sort cards by shape'). This 
protocol allows for an integrated analysis of ERPs to both feedback cues and 
target card events, providing separate ERP features for the shifting, updating, 
and rehearsal of attention sets in working memory. Two of these ERP indices are 
the frontal and posterior aspects of the P300 response. Feedback cues that 
direct a shift in set also elicit a frontally distributed P3a potential (300-400 
ms). Instead, target card events evoke increasingly larger posterior P3b 
(350-600 ms) activity as the new task set becomes gradually rehearsed. The 
observed modulations in the frontal and posterior aspects of the P300 response 
system are interpreted from current models of prefrontal cortex function in the 
executive control of attention.

DOI: 10.1016/s1385-299x(03)00013-8
PMID: 12697260 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


314. Behav Brain Res. 2012 Jul 15;233(1):90-8. doi: 10.1016/j.bbr.2012.04.044. Epub 
2012 May 2.

Practice on conflict tasks promotes executive function of working memory in the 
elderly.

Osaka M(1), Yaoi K, Otsuka Y, Katsuhara M, Osaka N.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Graduate School of Human Sciences, Osaka 
University, Japan. mosaka@hus.osaka-u.ac.jp

Effects of practice on a conflict task in elderly individuals are examined with 
a focus on its impact on executive function in working memory. During a 
short-term practice period, healthy elderly participants practiced switching 
attention using a Stroop task that involved a conflict between a task relevant 
stimulus and an irrelevant stimulus. To explore neural substrates underlying 
practice effects, two working memory tasks were used: a focus reading span test 
(F-RST) and a non-focus reading span test (NF-RST); the NF-RST test demanded 
greater switching attention due to a conflict between the relevant task stimulus 
and an irrelevant task stimulus, thus requiring an attention switch from the 
latter to the former. Following the Stroop task practice, fMRI data showed that 
participants who had engaged in practice had significant increases in activation 
in the anterior cingulate cortex (ACC), the left inferior parietal lobule (IPL), 
the left dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC) and the precuneus regions during 
the NF-RST. By contrast, a control group, which did not practice, showed no 
significant increases in these regions. Results suggest that practice on 
conflict tasks in elderly individuals activated regions related to conflict 
perceiving and attention switching regions as well as attention-maintenance 
regions thereby improving performance on tasks requiring a high degree of 
attention control of working memory.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbr.2012.04.044
PMID: 22579495 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


315. Dev Sci. 2011 Jan;14(1):148-61. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.00967.x.

A developmental neuroimaging investigation of the change paradigm.

Thomas LA(1), Hall JM, Skup M, Jenkins SE, Pine DS, Leibenluft E.

Author information:
(1)Mood and Anxiety Program, National Institute of Mental Health, National 
Institutes of Health/DHHS, 15K North Drive, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. 
tlaura@mail.nih.gov

This neuroimaging study examines the development of cognitive flexibility using 
the Change task in a sample of youths and adults. The Change task requires 
subjects to inhibit a prepotent response and substitute an alternative response, 
and the task incorporates an algorithm that adjusts task difficulty in response 
to subject performance. Data from both groups combined show a network of 
prefrontal and parietal areas that are active during the task. For adults vs. 
youths, a distributed network was more active for successful change trials 
versus go, baseline, or unsuccessful change trials. This network included areas 
involved in rule representation, retrieval (lateral PFC), and switching (medial 
PFC and parietal regions). These results are consistent with data from previous 
task-switching experiments and inform developmental understandings of cognitive 
flexibility.

Published 2010. This article is a US Government work and is in the public domain 
in the USA.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.00967.x
PMCID: PMC3036172
PMID: 21159096 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


316. Neuroimage. 2003 Sep;20(1):572-7. doi: 10.1016/s1053-8119(03)00206-4.

Equivalence of cognitive processes in brain imaging and behavioral studies: 
evidence from task switching.

Koch I(1), Ruge H, Brass M, Rubin O, Meiran N, Prinz W.

Author information:
(1)Max Planck Institute for Psychological Research, Munich, Germany. 
koch@psy.mpg.de

A growing number of studies on the higher-order cognitive functions of the human 
brain use brain-imaging techniques, such as functional magnetic resonance 
imaging (fMRI). For the validity and generality of fMRI results, it is important 
that the relevant cognitive processes are equivalent to those functioning in 
typical settings used in behavioral research. This equivalence could be, for 
example, endangered by different spatial frames of reference when lying in the 
scanner. In the present study, we tested whether the cognitive processes, as 
reflected in behavioral data in brain-imaging settings, are indeed functionally 
equivalent to those reflected in "purely" behavioral settings. To this end, we 
used a task-switching paradigm with a spatial component, increasing the 
likelihood to find effects of experimental setting. We compared the data of 
three different groups that only differed in testing environments (real, 
operating fMRI vs simulated fMRI vs standard behavioral with upright position of 
participants) but used otherwise strictly equivalent experimental conditions. Of 
importance for our validation purposes, unlike previous studies, we included a 
group with a behavioral setting, and we tested whether we would replicate a 
nontrivial, complex three-way interaction across all three groups. We replicated 
the predicted complex data pattern in all groups, suggesting functional 
equivalence of the underlying cognitive processes. We also found strongly 
increased reaction time (RT) levels in the two fMRI groups. We attribute this 
increase to unspecific distracting factors affecting late motor processes and 
discuss potential methodological implications of this increased baseline RT in 
the scanner.

DOI: 10.1016/s1053-8119(03)00206-4
PMID: 14527617 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


317. Biol Psychol. 2006 Aug;73(2):101-13. doi: 10.1016/j.biopsycho.2005.12.005. Epub 
2006 Mar 23.

Caffeine improves anticipatory processes in task switching.

Tieges Z(1), Snel J, Kok A, Wijnen JG, Lorist MM, Richard Ridderinkhof K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Amsterdam, Roetersstraat 15, 
Amsterdam, The Netherlands. Z.Tieges@uva.nl

We studied the effects of moderate amounts of caffeine on task switching and 
task maintenance using mixed-task (AABB) blocks, in which participants 
alternated predictably between two tasks, and single-task (AAAA, BBBB) blocks. 
Switch costs refer to longer reaction times (RT) on task switch trials (e.g. AB) 
compared to task-repeat trials (e.g. BB); mixing costs refer to longer RTs in 
task-repeat trials compared to single-task trials. In a double-blind, 
within-subjects experiment, two caffeine doses (3 and 5mg/kg body weight) and a 
placebo were administered to 18 coffee drinkers. Both caffeine doses reduced 
switch costs compared to placebo. Event-related brain potentials revealed a 
negative deflection developing within the preparatory interval, which was larger 
for switch than for repeat trials. Caffeine increased this switch-related 
difference. These results suggest that coffee consumption improves 
task-switching performance by enhancing anticipatory processing such as task set 
updating, presumably through the neurochemical effects of caffeine on the 
dopamine system.

DOI: 10.1016/j.biopsycho.2005.12.005
PMID: 16549227 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


318. Brain Res. 2012 Apr 27;1451:53-64. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2012.02.046. Epub 
2012 Feb 26.

Cognitive control: preparation of task switching components.

Hakun JG(1), Ravizza SM.

Author information:
(1)Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI 48824, USA. hakunjon@msu.edu

Task performance often improves when tasks can be prepared in advance. However, 
the mechanisms that support advance preparation are highly debated. Proceeding 
under the hypothesis that switch-specific neural activation during advance 
preparation is the hallmark of controlled processing, this study investigates 
the behavioral and neural effects of component preparation during 
task-switching. Toward this end, fMRI was used to observe neural activity during 
preparation of response rules (RULE task) compared to preparation of stimulus 
set (PERCEPTUAL task). We predicted that switch-specific activation would be 
observed for RULE and PERCEPTUAL switching when component preparation was 
isolated from target-related activation. The results indicated that preparation 
for both tasks was supported by common regions of activation; however 
preparation for switches of response rule was supported by switch-specific 
activation of the anterior cingulate (ACC) and left lateral prefrontal cortex 
(LPFC). Shift-cost was also eradicated in this condition with enough preparation 
time, and was associated with an increase in ACC activation. Switches of 
stimulus set were not marked by specific neural activity during the preparation 
interval. While the amount of preparation time affected overall performance, 
PERCEPTUAL task switches did not benefit more from preparation time than task 
repeats. It was concluded that response rules can be reconfigured pre-target due 
to the support of ACC-LPFC activation, where preparation of stimulus sets is 
supported by a general type of configuration common to both components.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.brainres.2012.02.046
PMID: 22444277 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


319. Brain. 2008 Aug;131(Pt 8):2094-105. doi: 10.1093/brain/awn112. Epub 2008 Jun 24.

Parkinson's disease and dopaminergic therapy--differential effects on movement, 
reward and cognition.

Rowe JB(1), Hughes L, Ghosh BC, Eckstein D, Williams-Gray CH, Fallon S, Barker 
RA, Owen AM.

Author information:
(1)University of Cambridge Department of Clinical Neurosciences, Cambridge, CB2 
7EF, UK. james.rowe@mrc-cbu.cam.ac.uk

Cognitive deficits are very common in Parkinson's disease particularly for 
'executive functions' associated with frontal cortico-striatal networks. 
Previous work has identified deficits in tasks that require attentional control 
like task-switching, and reward-based tasks like gambling or reversal learning. 
However, there is a complex relationship between the specific cognitive problems 
faced by an individual patient, their stage of disease and dopaminergic 
treatment. We used a bimodality continuous performance task during fMRI to 
examine how patients with Parkinson's disease represent the prospect of reward 
and switch between competing task rules accordingly. The task-switch was not 
separately cued but was based on the implicit reward relevance of spatial and 
verbal dimensions of successive compound stimuli. Nineteen patients were studied 
in relative 'on' and 'off' states, induced by dopaminergic medication withdrawal 
(Hoehn and Yahr stages 1-4). Patients were able to successfully complete the 
task and establish a bias to one or other dimension in order to gain reward. 
However the lateral prefrontal cortex and caudate nucleus showed a non-linear 
U-shape relationship between motor disease severity and regional brain 
activation. Dopaminergic treatment led to a shift in this U-shape function, 
supporting the hypothesis of differential neurodegeneration in separate motor 
and cognitive cortico-striato-thalamo-cortical circuits. In addition, anterior 
cingulate activation associated with reward expectation declined with more 
severe disease, whereas activation following actual rewards increased with more 
severe disease. This may facilitate a change in goal-directed behaviours from 
deferred predicted rewards to immediate actual rewards, particularly when on 
dopaminergic treatment. We discuss the implications for investigation and 
optimal treatment of this common condition at different stages of disease.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/awn112
PMCID: PMC2494617
PMID: 18577547 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


320. Neuropsychologia. 2010 Apr;48(5):1305-23. doi: 
10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2009.12.034. Epub 2009 Dec 28.

Compensatory mechanisms underlie intact task-switching performance in 
schizophrenia.

Jamadar S(1), Michie P, Karayanidis F.

Author information:
(1)Functional Neuroimaging Laboratory, School of Psychology, University of 
Newcastle, Australia.

Individuals with schizophrenia tend to perform poorly on many measures of 
cognitive control. However, recent task-switching studies suggest that they show 
intact task-switching performance, despite the fact that the regions involved in 
task-switching are known to be structurally and functionally impaired in the 
disorder. Behavioral, event-related potential (ERP) and functional magnetic 
resonance imaging (fMRI) measures were used to compare the temporal and spatial 
dynamics of task-switching performance in individuals with schizophrenia and 
controls. Consistent with previous studies, reaction time (RT) switch cost and 
its reduction with anticipatory preparation did not differ between groups. There 
were also no group differences on cue-locked ERP components associated with 
anticipatory preparation processes. However, both stimulus- and response-locked 
ERPs were significantly disrupted in schizophrenia, suggesting difficulty with 
task-set implementation. fMRI analyses indicated that individuals with 
schizophrenia showed hyperactivity in the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex and 
posterior parietal cortex. RT-fMRI and ERP-fMRI associations suggested that 
individuals with schizophrenia employ compensatory mechanisms to overcome 
difficulties in task-set implementation and thereby achieve the same behavioral 
outcomes as controls.

(c) 2009 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2009.12.034
PMID: 20036266 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


321. Brain Res Cogn Brain Res. 2005 Jul;24(2):237-51. doi: 
10.1016/j.cogbrainres.2005.01.023. Epub 2005 Mar 23.

Involvement of both prefrontal and inferior parietal cortex in dual-task 
performance.

Collette F(1), Olivier L, Van der Linden M, Laureys S, Delfiore G, Luxen A, 
Salmon E.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuropsychology, University of Liège, Belgium. 
f.collette@ulg.ac.be

This PET study explored the neural substrate of both dual-task management and 
integration task using single tasks that are known not to evoke any prefrontal 
activation. The paradigm included two simple (visual and auditory) 
discrimination tasks, a dual task and an integration task (requiring 
simultaneous visual and auditory discrimination), and baseline tasks (passive 
viewing and hearing). Data were analyzed using SPM99. As predicted, the 
comparison of each single task to the baseline task showed no activity in 
prefrontal areas. The comparison of the dual task to the single tasks 
demonstrated left-sided foci of activity in the frontal gyrus (BA 9/46, BA 10/47 
and BA 6), inferior parietal gyrus (BA 40), and cerebellum. By reference to 
previous neuroimaging studies, BA 9/46 was associated with the coordinated 
manipulation of simultaneously presented information, BA 10/47 with selection 
processes, BA 6 with articulatory rehearsal, and BA 40 with attentional 
shifting. Globally similar regions were found for the integration task, except 
that the inferior parietal gyrus was not recruited. These results confirm the 
hypothesis that the left prefrontal cortex is implicated in dual-task 
performance. Moreover, the involvement of a parietal area in the dual task is in 
keeping with the hypothesis that a parieto-frontal network sustains executive 
functioning.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cogbrainres.2005.01.023
PMID: 15993762 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


322. J Int Neuropsychol Soc. 2012 Jan;18(1):57-67. doi: 10.1017/S1355617711001391. 
Epub 2011 Oct 12.

Role of frontotemporal fiber tract integrity in task-switching performance of 
healthy controls and patients with temporal lobe epilepsy.

Kucukboyaci NE(1), Girard HM, Hagler DJ Jr, Kuperman J, Tecoma ES, Iragui VJ, 
Halgren E, McDonald CR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of California-San Diego, La Jolla, CA 
92037, USA. erkut@ucsd.edu

The objective of this study is to investigate the relationships among 
frontotemporal fiber tract compromise and task-switching performance in healthy 
controls and patients with temporal lobe epilepsy (TLE). We performed diffusion 
tensor imaging (DTI) on 30 controls and 32 patients with TLE (15 left TLE). 
Fractional anisotropy (FA) was calculated for four fiber tracts [uncinate 
fasciculus (UncF), arcuate fasciculus (ArcF), dorsal cingulum (CING), and 
inferior fronto-occipital fasciculus (IFOF)]. Participants completed the Trail 
Making Test-B (TMT-B) and Verbal Fluency Category Switching (VFCS) test. 
Multivariate analyses of variances (MANOVAs) were performed to investigate group 
differences in fiber FA and set-shifting performances. Canonical correlations 
were used to examine the overall patterns of structural-cognitive relationships 
and were followed by within-group bivariate correlations. We found a significant 
canonical correlation between fiber FA and task-switching performance. In 
controls, TMT-B correlated with left IFOF, whereas VFCS correlated with FA of 
left ArcF and left UncF. These correlations were not significant in patients 
with TLE. We report significant correlations between frontotemporal fiber tract 
integrity and set-shifting performance in healthy controls that appear to be 
absent or attenuated in patients with TLE. These findings suggest a breakdown of 
typical structure-function relationships in TLE that may reflect aberrant 
developmental or degenerative processes.

DOI: 10.1017/S1355617711001391
PMCID: PMC3482626
PMID: 22014246 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


323. Eur J Neurosci. 2025 Nov;62(9):e70318. doi: 10.1111/ejn.70318.

The Human Claustrum Activates Across Multiple Cognitive Control Tasks.

Huang CHL(1)(2), Stewart BW(3), Liu CY(4), Phylactou P(5)(6), Mathur BN(7)(8), 
Seminowicz DA(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Schulich School of Medicine & Dentistry, 
University of Western Ontario, London, Ontario, Canada.
(2)Department of Pharmacology & Toxicology, Temerty Faculty of Medicine, 
University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(3)Department of Neural and Pain Sciences, University of Maryland School of 
Dentistry, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.
(4)Department of Medical Biophysics, Schulich School of Medicine & Dentistry, 
University of Western Ontario, London, Ontario, Canada.
(5)School of Physical Therapy, University of Western Ontario, London, Ontario, 
Canada.
(6)The Gray Centre for Mobility and Activity, Parkwood Institute, London, 
Ontario, Canada.
(7)Department of Pharmacology, University of Maryland School of Medicine, 
Baltimore, Maryland, USA.
(8)Department of Psychiatry, University of Maryland School of Medicine, 
Baltimore, Maryland, USA.

Cognitive control, the ability to manage information during purposeful actions, 
is crucial for everyday functioning and can become impaired in a variety of 
neuropsychiatric disorders. The claustrum, a subcortical brain structure with 
widespread cortical connections, is proposed to activate with cognitive load to 
support cortical network demands across cognitive domains. With this model in 
mind, we examined the claustrum signal within a dataset (n = 55) that includes 
functional MRI (fMRI) of healthy participants engaged in four well-established 
cognitive control tasks: the Stroop task, AX-continuous performance task 
(AX-CPT), cued task-switching and Sternberg working memory task. Bilateral 
claustrum activation was observed during certain conditions and trial phases of 
all four tasks, particularly during times of increased cognitive demand, and 
coinciding with task-positive cortical network activations. These findings 
demonstrate claustrum activation across multiple cognitive control tasks and 
potentially pave the way for new insights into how cognitive processes are 
compromised in neuropsychiatric disorders.

© 2025 The Author(s). European Journal of Neuroscience published by Federation 
of European Neuroscience Societies and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/ejn.70318
PMCID: PMC12617337
PMID: 41235903 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.


324. Brain. 2008 Feb;131(Pt 2):397-408. doi: 10.1093/brain/awm313. Epub 2008 Jan 4.

Attentional control in Parkinson's disease is dependent on COMT val 158 met 
genotype.

Williams-Gray CH(1), Hampshire A, Barker RA, Owen AM.

Author information:
(1)Cambridge Centre for Brain Repair, Department of Clinical Neurosciences, 
University of Cambridge, Forvie Site, Robinson Way, Cambridge, CB2 2PY, UK. 
chm27@cam.ac.uk

Cognitive deficits occur even in the earliest stages of Parkinson's disease. 
Some such deficits are known to relate to dysfunction in dopaminergic 
frontostriatal networks, and may be influenced by a common functional 
polymorphism (val(158)met) within the catechol O-methyltransferase (COMT) gene. 
Abnormal attentional shifting behaviour is an important and well-recognized 
cognitive problem in PD, but nonetheless its precise cognitive and neural basis 
remains unclear. Here we explored this impairment in an fMRI study employing a 
recently developed cognitive task designed to fractionate components of 
attentional control. We investigated the impact of the COMT val(158)met genotype 
and dopaminergic medication on both patterns of behaviour and associated brain 
activation in 29 medicated patients with early PD. Genotype had a critical 
impact on task strategy: whilst patients with high activity COMT genotypes 
(val/val) adopted a typical approach of preferentially shifting attention within 
rather than between dimensions, those with low activity genotypes (met/met) 
failed to adopt such a strategy, suggesting an inability to form an attentional 
'set'. Moreover, this behaviour was associated with significant underactivation 
across the frontoparietal attentional network. Furthermore, we demonstrated an 
interactive effect of COMT genotype and dopaminergic medication on task 
performance and BOLD response. Hence we have shown for the first time that 
attentional control in PD is critically determined by genetic and 
pharmacological influences on dopaminergic activity in frontoparietal networks. 
This has important implications for understanding the neurobiological basis of 
attentional control, and highlights the risk of medication-induced cognitive 
dysfunction in certain genotypic groups of PD patients, which may ultimately 
impact on clinical practice.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/awm313
PMID: 18178571 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


325. Hum Brain Mapp. 2018 Mar;39(3):1270-1282. doi: 10.1002/hbm.23915. Epub 2017 Dec 
19.

Structural connectivity of the amygdala in young adults with autism spectrum 
disorder.

Gibbard CR(1), Ren J(2), Skuse DH(2), Clayden JD(1), Clark CA(1).

Author information:
(1)Developmental Imaging and Biophysics Section, UCL Great Ormond Street 
Institute of Child Health, 30 Guilford Street, London, WC1N 1EH, United Kingdom.
(2)Behavioural Sciences Unit, UCL Great Ormond Street Institute of Child Health, 
30 Guilford Street, London, WC1N 1EH, United Kingdom.

Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is characterized by impairments in social 
cognition, a function associated with the amygdala. Subdivisions of the amygdala 
have been identified which show specificity of structure, connectivity, and 
function. Little is known about amygdala connectivity in ASD. The aim of this 
study was to investigate the microstructural properties of amygdala-cortical 
connections and their association with ASD behaviours, and whether connectivity 
of specific amygdala subregions is associated with particular ASD traits. The 
brains of 51 high-functioning young adults (25 with ASD; 26 controls) were 
scanned using MRI. Amygdala volume was measured, and amygdala-cortical 
connectivity estimated using probabilistic tractography. An iterative 'winner 
takes all' algorithm was used to parcellate the amygdala based on its primary 
cortical connections. Measures of amygdala connectivity were correlated with 
clinical scores. In comparison with controls, amygdala volume was greater in ASD 
(F(1,94) = 4.19; p = .04). In white matter (WM) tracts connecting the right 
amygdala to the right cortex, ASD subjects showed increased mean diffusivity 
(t = 2.35; p = .05), which correlated with the severity of emotion recognition 
deficits (rho = -0.53; p = .01). Following amygdala parcellation, in ASD 
subjects reduced fractional anisotropy in WM connecting the left amygdala to the 
temporal cortex was associated with with greater attention switching impairment 
(rho = -0.61; p = .02). This study demonstrates that both amygdala volume and 
the microstructure of connections between the amygdala and the cortex are 
altered in ASD. Findings indicate that the microstructure of right amygdala WM 
tracts are associated with overall ASD severity, but that investigation of 
amygdala subregions can identify more specific associations.

© 2017 The Authors Human Brain Mapping Published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/hbm.23915
PMCID: PMC5838552
PMID: 29265723 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


326. J Cogn Neurosci. 2004 Mar;16(2):318-30. doi: 10.1162/089892904322984599.

Reflexive, symbolic, and affective contributions to eye movements during task 
switching: response selection.

Hodgson TL(1), Golding C, Molyva D, Rosenthal CR, Kennard C.

Author information:
(1)Washington Singer Laboratories, School of Psychology, University of Exeter, 
UK. t.l.hodgson@ex.ac.uk

Active vision is a dynamic process involving the flexible coordination of 
different gaze strategies to achieve behavioral goals. Although many complex 
behaviors rely on an ability to efficiently switch between gaze-control 
strategies, few studies to date have examined mechanisms of task level 
oculomotor control in detail. Here, we report five experiments in which subjects 
alternated between conflicting stimulus-saccade mappings within a block of 
trials. The first experiment showed that there is no performance cost associated 
with switching between pro and anti saccades. However, follow-up experiments 
demonstrate that whenever subjects alternate between arbitrary stimulus-saccade 
mappings, latency costs are apparent on the first trial after a task change. 
More detailed analysis of switch costs showed that latencies were particularly 
elevated for saccades directed toward the same location that had been the target 
for a saccade on the preceeding trial. This saccade "inhibition of return" 
effect was most marked when unexpected error feedbacks cued task switches, 
suggesting that saccade selection processes are modulated by reward. We conclude 
that there are two systems for saccade control that differ in their 
characteristics following a task switch. The "reflexive" control system can be 
enabled/disabled in advance of saccade execution without incurring any 
performance cost. Switch costs are only observed when two or more arbitrary 
stimulus-saccade mappings have to be coordinated by a "symbolic" control system.

DOI: 10.1162/089892904322984599
PMID: 15068600 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


327. Neuroimage Clin. 2015 Oct 24;9:660-7. doi: 10.1016/j.nicl.2015.10.011. 
eCollection 2015.

Scene unseen: Disrupted neuronal adaptation in melancholia during emotional film 
viewing.

Hyett MP(1), Parker GB(2), Guo CC(3), Zalesky A(4), Nguyen VT(3), Yuen T(2), 
Breakspear M(5).

Author information:
(1)School of Psychiatry, University of New South Wales, Black Dog Institute 
Building, Prince of Wales Hospital, Hospital Road, Randwick, NSW 2031, 
Australia; QIMR Berghofer Medical Research Institute, 300 Herston Road, Herston, 
QLD 4006, Australia.
(2)School of Psychiatry, University of New South Wales, Black Dog Institute 
Building, Prince of Wales Hospital, Hospital Road, Randwick, NSW 2031, 
Australia; Black Dog Institute, Prince of Wales Hospital, Hospital Road, 
Randwick, NSW 2031, Australia.
(3)QIMR Berghofer Medical Research Institute, 300 Herston Road, Herston, QLD 
4006, Australia.
(4)Melbourne Neuropsychiatry Centre, Faculty of Medicine, Dentistry and Health 
Science & Melbourne School of Engineering, University of Melbourne, VIC 3010, 
Australia.
(5)QIMR Berghofer Medical Research Institute, 300 Herston Road, Herston, QLD 
4006, Australia; The Royal Brisbane and Women's Hospital, Butterfield Street, 
Herston, QLD 4006, Australia.

Impairments in attention and concentration are distinctive features of 
melancholic depression, and may diminish the ability to shift focus away from 
internal dysphoric states. Disrupted brain networks may underlie the inability 
to effectively disengage from interoceptive signals in this disorder. This study 
investigates changes in effective connectivity between cortical systems 
supporting attention, interoception, and perception in those with melancholic 
depression when shifting attention from rest to viewing dynamic film stimuli. We 
hypothesised that those with melancholia would show impaired attentional 
shifting from rest to emotional film viewing, captured in neuronal states that 
differed little across conditions. Functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) 
data were acquired from 48 participants (16 melancholic depressed, 16 
non-melancholic depressed, and 16 healthy controls) at rest and whilst viewing 
emotionally salient movies. Using independent component analysis, we identified 
8 cortical modes (default mode, executive control, left/right frontoparietal 
attention, left/right insula, visual and auditory) and studied their dynamics 
using dynamic causal modelling. Engagement with dynamic emotional material 
diminished in melancholia and was associated with network-wide increases in 
effective connectivity. Melancholia was also characterised by an increase in 
effective connectivity amongst cortical regions involved in attention and 
interoception when shifting from rest to negative film viewing, with the 
converse pattern in control participants. The observed involvement of attention- 
and insula-based cortical systems highlights a potential neurobiological 
mechanism for disrupted attentional resource allocation, particularly in 
switching between interoceptive and exteroceptive signals, in melancholia.

DOI: 10.1016/j.nicl.2015.10.011
PMCID: PMC4660155
PMID: 26740919 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


328. Cereb Cortex. 2008 Jul;18(7):1496-505. doi: 10.1093/cercor/bhm182. Epub 2007 Oct 
18.

Language control and lexical competition in bilinguals: an event-related FMRI 
study.

Abutalebi J(1), Annoni JM, Zimine I, Pegna AJ, Seghier ML, Lee-Jahnke H, 
Lazeyras F, Cappa SF, Khateb A.

Author information:
(1)Centre for Cognitive Neurosciences, Vita Salute San Raffaele University and 
Scientific Institute San Raffaele, 20132 Milan, Italy.

Language selection (or control) refers to the cognitive mechanism that controls 
which language to use at a given moment and context. It allows bilinguals to 
selectively communicate in one target language while minimizing the 
interferences from the nontarget language. Previous studies have suggested the 
participation in language control of different brain areas. However, the 
question remains whether the selection of one language among others relies on a 
language-specific neural module or general executive regions that also allow 
switching between different competing behavioral responses including the 
switching between various linguistic registers. In this functional magnetic 
resonance imaging study, we investigated the neural correlates of language 
selection processes in German-French bilingual subjects during picture naming in 
different monolingual and bilingual selection contexts. We show that naming in 
the first language in the bilingual context (compared with monolingual contexts) 
increased activation in the left caudate and anterior cingulate cortex. 
Furthermore, the activation of these areas is even more extended when the 
subjects are using a second weaker language. These findings show that language 
control processes engaged in contexts during which both languages must remain 
active recruit the left caudate and the anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) in a 
manner that can be distinguished from areas engaged in intralanguage task 
switching.

DOI: 10.1093/cercor/bhm182
PMID: 17947346 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


329. Psychopharmacology (Berl). 2009 Jan;202(1-3):295-306. doi: 
10.1007/s00213-008-1364-8. Epub 2008 Oct 17.

Asenapine restores cognitive flexibility in rats with medial prefrontal cortex 
lesions.

Tait DS(1), Marston HM, Shahid M, Brown VJ.

Author information:
(1)School of Psychology, University of St Andrews, St Andrews, Scotland, 
KY169RH, UK.

RATIONALE: Cognitive inflexibility in schizophrenia is treatment-resistant and 
predictive of poor outcome. This study examined the effect of asenapine, a novel 
psychopharmacologic agent being developed for schizophrenia and bipolar 
disorder, on cognitive dysfunction in the rat.
OBJECTIVES: The objective of this paper was to establish whether asenapine has a 
beneficial effect on the performance of rats with ibotenic acid-induced lesion 
of the medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC) in an intradimensional/extradimensional 
(ID/ED) test of cognitive flexibility.
METHODS: The effect of subcutaneously administered asenapine (0.75, 7.5, 75 
microg/kg) on ID/ED performance of controls or mPFC-lesioned rats was examined 
using a within-subjects, repeated-measures design. In a second experiment, 
lesioned and control rats were tested with or without asenapine in a modified 
version of the task, with multiple set-shifts, before brains were processed for 
Fos-immunoreactivity in the mPFC.
RESULTS: The mPFC lesion-induced deficit in the ID/ED task was stable with 
repeated testing over more than two months. Asenapine (75 microg/kg s.c., p < 
0.05) completely restored the performance of lesioned rats. Experiment 2 
replicated both lesion and asenapine effects and demonstrated that it is 
possible to measure set-shifting multiple times within a test session. Asenapine 
(75 microg/kg s.c.) was associated with differential activation of the neurons 
in the anterior mPFC of lesioned animals, but was without effect in controls.
CONCLUSION: Asenapine can ameliorate mPFC lesion-induced impairment in 
attentional set-shifting, and is associated with a greater activation of the 
spared neurons in the anterior mPFC. These data suggest that asenapine may 
benefit impaired cognitive flexibility in disorders such as schizophrenia.

DOI: 10.1007/s00213-008-1364-8
PMID: 18925388 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


330. J Neurosci. 2011 Mar 30;31(13):4771-9. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5923-10.2011.

Common and distinct mechanisms of cognitive flexibility in prefrontal cortex.

Kim C(1), Johnson NF, Cilles SE, Gold BT.

Author information:
(1)Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology, University of Kentucky, Lexington, 
Kentucky 40536, USA.

The human ability to flexibly alternate between tasks represents a central 
component of cognitive control. Neuroimaging studies have linked task switching 
with a diverse set of prefrontal cortex (PFC) regions, but the contributions of 
these regions to various forms of cognitive flexibility remain largely unknown. 
Here, subjects underwent functional brain imaging while they completed a 
paradigm that selectively induced stimulus, response, or cognitive set switches 
in the context of a single task decision performed on a common set of stimuli. 
Behavioral results indicated comparable reaction time costs associated with each 
switch type. Domain-general task-switching activation was observed in the 
inferior frontal junction and posterior parietal cortex, suggesting core roles 
for these regions in switching such as updating and representing task sets. In 
contrast, multiple domain-preferential PFC activations were observed across 
lateral and medial PFC, with progressively more rostral regions recruited as 
switches became increasingly abstract. Specifically, highly abstract cognitive 
set switches recruited anterior-PFC regions, moderately abstract response 
switches recruited mid-PFC regions, and highly constrained stimulus switches 
recruited posterior-PFC regions. These results demonstrate a functional 
organization across lateral and medial PFC according to the level of abstraction 
associated with acts of cognitive flexibility.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5923-10.2011
PMCID: PMC3086290
PMID: 21451015 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


331. Dev Sci. 2004 Nov;7(5):534-42. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2004.00377.x.

Early development of subcortical regions involved in non-cued attention 
switching.

Casey BJ(1), Davidson MC, Hara Y, Thomas KM, Martinez A, Galvan A, Halperin JM, 
Rodríguez-Aranda CE, Tottenham N.

Author information:
(1)Sackler Institute, Weill Medical College of Cornell University, New York, NY 
10021, USA. bjc2002@med.cornell.edu

This study examined the cognitive and neural development of attention switching 
using a simple forced-choice attention task and functional magnetic resonance 
imaging Fourteen children and adults made discriminations among stimuli based on 
either shape or color. Performance on these trials was compared to performance 
during blocked trials requiring all color or all shape discriminations. Magnetic 
resonance echo planar images were acquired during performance of the task. Both 
children and adults showed robust bilateral activity of the caudate nucleus when 
switching attention between color and shape discriminations that correlated 
negatively with mean response latency on these trials. However, neither 
switching costs nor caudate activity correlated with age, suggesting early 
development of the underlying neural circuitry involved in switching between 
salient stimulus sets. Overall, children and adults differed in performance and 
patterns of brain activity on the task, with adults responding more accurately 
and faster than children, and recruiting more prefrontal and parietal regions. 
These results suggest an important role of subcortical regions (i.e. caudate 
nucleus) in non-cued attention switching, with increasing recruitment of 
cortical regions with age.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2004.00377.x
PMID: 15603286 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


332. J Cogn Neurosci. 2006 Jun;18(6):949-65. doi: 10.1162/jocn.2006.18.6.949.

Fractionating the neural mechanisms of cognitive control.

Kopp B(1), Tabeling S, Moschner C, Wessel K.

Author information:
(1)Municipal Hospital, Braunschweig, Germany. b.kopp@klinikum-braunschweig.de

Modifications of the Wisconsin Card Sorting Test were established. In these new 
task variants, participants were asked to exert sequential control over 
attentional sets or over intentional sets (task domain factor). Attentional set 
shifting requires changing the priorities by which sensory stimuli are selected, 
whereas intentional set shifting requires changing the priorities by which motor 
responses are selected. Auditory stimuli that signaled to maintain or shift set 
were presented immediately before (precuing) or after (postcuing) the selection 
of cards (cue timing factor). Twenty-four healthy young individuals 
participated. Performance data (response times, error percentages) indicated 
that intentional tasks were easier to perform than attentional tasks. The 
electroencephalogram was recorded during task performance, and the N1, medial 
frontal negativity (MFN), P3a, and sustained potential (SP) components of the 
cue event-related brain potentials (ERPs) were analyzed. Irrespective of the 
task domain, shift precues led to increased N1 amplitudes compared to shift 
postcues. When intentional sets had to be shifted, the MFNs in the postcuing 
condition were more pronounced than in the precuing condition. On the other 
hand, shifts of attentional sets resulted in a more prominent P3a in response to 
postcues compared to precues. Irrespective of the task domain, the shift effect 
that was evident in SPs was more pronounced in precue ERPs compared to postcue 
ERPs. We conclude that ERPs provide valid measures to empirically constrain 
theories about the neural mechanisms of cognitive control. The domain hypothesis 
of the fractionation of the neural mechanisms of cognitive control is 
introduced.

DOI: 10.1162/jocn.2006.18.6.949
PMID: 16839302 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


333. Hum Brain Mapp. 2016 Nov;37(11):4084-4098. doi: 10.1002/hbm.23297.

Alterations in brain white matter contributing to age-related slowing of task 
switching performance: The role of radial diffusivity and magnetization transfer 
ratio.

Serbruyns L(1), Leunissen I(1), van Ruitenbeek P(1), Pauwels L(1), Caeyenberghs 
K(1)(2), Solesio-Jofre E(1), Geurts M(1), Cuypers K(1)(3), Meesen RL(1)(3), 
Sunaert S(4), Leemans A(5), Swinnen SP(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)Motor Control Laboratory, Movement Control and Neuroplasticity Research 
Group, Group Biomedical Sciences, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(2)School of Psychology, Faculty of Health Sciences, Australian Catholic 
University, Australia.
(3)REVAL Rehabilitation Research Centre, Biomedical Research Institute, Faculty 
of Medicine and Life Sciences, Hasselt University, Diepenbeek, Belgium.
(4)Medical Imaging Research Center, Group Biomedical Sciences, KU Leuven, 
Leuven, Belgium.
(5)Image Sciences Institute, University Medical Center Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(6)Motor Control Laboratory, Movement Control and Neuroplasticity Research 
Group, Group Biomedical Sciences, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium. 
Stephan.Swinnen@faber.kuleuven.be.
(7)KU Leuven, Leuven Research Institute for Neuroscience & Disease (LIND), 
Belgium. Stephan.Swinnen@faber.kuleuven.be.

Successfully switching between tasks is critical in many daily activities. 
Age-related slowing of this switching behavior has been documented extensively, 
but the underlying neural mechanisms remain unclear. Here, we investigated the 
contribution of brain white matter changes associated with myelin alterations to 
age-related slowing of switching performance. Diffusion tensor imaging derived 
radial diffusivity (RD) and magnetization transfer imaging derived magnetization 
transfer ratio (MTR) were selected as myelin sensitive measures. These metrics 
were studied in relation to mixing cost (i.e., the increase in reaction time 
during task blocks that require task switching) on a local-global switching task 
in young (n = 24) and older (n = 22) adults. Results showed that higher age was 
associated with widespread increases in RD and decreases in MTR, indicative of 
white matter deterioration, possibly due to demyelination. Older adults also 
showed a higher mixing cost, implying slowing of switching performance. Finally, 
mediation analyses demonstrated that decreases in MTR of the bilateral superior 
corona radiata contributed to the observed slowing of switching performance with 
increasing age. These findings provide evidence for a role of 
cortico-subcortical white matter changes in task switching performance 
deterioration with healthy aging. Hum Brain Mapp 37:4084-4098, 2016. © 2016 
Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

© 2016 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/hbm.23297
PMCID: PMC6867406
PMID: 27571231 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


334. Hum Brain Mapp. 2018 Feb;39(2):735-746. doi: 10.1002/hbm.23878. Epub 2017 Nov 2.

When global rule reversal meets local task switching: The neural mechanisms of 
coordinated behavioral adaptation to instructed multi-level demand changes.

Shi Y(1), Wolfensteller U(1), Schubert T(2)(3), Ruge H(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Technische Universität Dresden, Germany.
(2)Department of Psychology, Humboldt Universität Berlin, Germany.
(3)Department of Psychology, Martin-Luther University Halle-Wittenber, Germany.

Cognitive flexibility is essential to cope with changing task demands and often 
it is necessary to adapt to combined changes in a coordinated manner. The 
present fMRI study examined how the brain implements such multi-level adaptation 
processes. Specifically, on a "local," hierarchically lower level, switching 
between two tasks was required across trials while the rules of each task 
remained unchanged for blocks of trials. On a "global" level regarding blocks of 
twelve trials, the task rules could reverse or remain the same. The current task 
was cued at the start of each trial while the current task rules were instructed 
before the start of a new block. We found that partly overlapping and partly 
segregated neural networks play different roles when coping with the combination 
of global rule reversal and local task switching. The fronto-parietal control 
network (FPN) supported the encoding of reversed rules at the time of explicit 
rule instruction. The same regions subsequently supported local task switching 
processes during actual implementation trials, irrespective of rule reversal 
condition. By contrast, a cortico-striatal network (CSN) including supplementary 
motor area and putamen was increasingly engaged across implementation trials and 
more so for rule reversal than for nonreversal blocks, irrespective of task 
switching condition. Together, these findings suggest that the brain 
accomplishes the coordinated adaptation to multi-level demand changes by 
distributing processing resources either across time (FPN for reversed rule 
encoding and later for task switching) or across regions (CSN for reversed rule 
implementation and FPN for concurrent task switching).

© 2017 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/hbm.23878
PMCID: PMC6866278
PMID: 29094788 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


335. Soc Cogn Affect Neurosci. 2012 Apr;7(4):423-30. doi: 10.1093/scan/nsr028. Epub 
2011 Jul 6.

Frontostriatal response to set switching is moderated by reward sensitivity.

Avila C(1), Garbin G, Sanjuán A, Forn C, Barrós-Loscertales A, Bustamante JC, 
Rodríguez-Pujadas A, Belloch V, Parcet MA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psicologia, Campus Riu Sec, Fac. Ciències Humanes i Socials, 
Universitat Jaume I, E-12071 Castelló, Spain. avila@psb.uji.es

The reinforcement sensitivity theory (RST) relates individual differences in 
reward sensitivity to the activation of the behavioral approach system (BAS). 
Dopamine-related brain structures have been repeatedly associated with reward 
processing, but also with cognitive processes such as task switching. In the 
present study, we examined the association between reward sensitivity and the 
event-related fMRI BOLD response with set switching in 31 males. As expected, 
the right inferior frontal cortex (rIFG) and the striatum (i.e. the left 
putamen) were involved in set-switching activity for the overall sample. 
Interindividual differences in Gray's reward sensitivity were related to 
stronger activity in the rIFG and the ventral striatum. Thus, trait reward 
sensitivity contributed to the modulation of brain responsiveness in 
set-switching tasks. Having considered previous research, we propose that higher 
BAS activity is associated with a stronger reward to process a better 
implementation of goal-directed tasks and the diminished processing of secondary 
cues.

DOI: 10.1093/scan/nsr028
PMCID: PMC3324573
PMID: 21737433 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


336. J Cogn Neurosci. 2012 Mar;24(3):611-26. doi: 10.1162/jocn_a_00149. Epub 2011 Oct 
7.

On the automaticity of semantic processing during task switching.

Vachon F(1), Jolicœur P.

Author information:
(1)Université Laval, Canada. francois.vachon@psy.ulaval.ca

There is growing evidence that processes formerly believed to be automatic are, 
in fact, strongly modulated by top-down influences. The purpose of the present 
work was to investigate how cognitive control can affect the purported 
automaticity of word processing by examining the impact of task switching on 
semantic processing using the ERP technique. In the context of the psychological 
refractory period dual-task paradigm, two experiments contrasted the 
context-sensitive N400 ERP elicited by the second of two target words under 
conditions that involved either a task switch or no-task switch. Although the 
N400 was not affected by SOA in the absence of switching, it was strongly 
attenuated at short SOAs when the psychological refractory period procedure 
involved a switch from a perceptual to a semantic task (Experiment 1) or a 
switch between two different semantic tasks (Experiment 2). These findings 
suggest that semantic processing cannot be performed in parallel with task 
switching and illustrate limitations in the ability of the cognitive system to 
adapt flexibly to the dynamically changing challenges of the environment 
according to task demands and behavioral goals.

DOI: 10.1162/jocn_a_00149
PMID: 21981671 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


337. J Res Med Sci. 2025 Oct 30;30:56. doi: 10.4103/jrms.jrms_406_24. eCollection 
2025.

Comparison of the performance of machine learning algorithms for the 
task-switching functional magnetic resonance imaging data for distinguishing 
attention deficit hyperactivity disorder from bipolar disorder.

Solouki L(1)(2), Shahsavari S(2)(3), Sharini H(4), Hashemian AH(3), Mohammadian 
Y(5), Mohammadi H(6), Mahaki B(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Student Research Committee, Kermanshah University of Medical Sciences, 
Kermanshah, Iran.
(2)Health Data Science Research Center, Health Research Institute, Kermanshah 
University of Medical Sciences, Kermanshah, Iran.
(3)Department of Biostatistics, School of Health, Kermanshah University of 
Medical Sciences, Kermanshah, Iran.
(4)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Faculty of Medicine, Kermanshah 
University of Medical Sciences, Kermanshah, Iran.
(5)Department of Clinical Psychology, Kermanshah University of Medical Sciences, 
Kermanshah, Iran.
(6)Neuroscience Research Center, Health Institute, Kermanshah University of 
Medical Sciences, Kermanshah, Iran.

BACKGROUND: Bipolar disorder (BD) and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder 
(ADHD) are two distinct psychiatric disorders characterized by significant 
overlap in symptoms, making differential diagnosis challenging. Due to the lack 
of a definitive test for diagnosing and differentiating these disorders, the 
present study aimed to accurately diagnose and differentiate between patients 
with BD and ADHD using the support vector machines (SVM) with radial basis 
function, polynomial, and mixture kernels, as well as ensemble neural networks, 
to analyze functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) data.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: In this study, 49 individuals with BD and 40 individuals 
with ADHD were analyzed. A protocol based on fMRI imaging and a switching task 
was proposed for diagnosing ADHD and BD. The graph theory method calculated the 
graph criteria using the CONN toolbox in 15 areas of the attention circuit. The 
effective features were then selected using the genetic algorithm (GA), and 
finally, the performance of the models was evaluated using four criteria: 
accuracy (ACC), sensitivity (SE), specificity (SP), and area under the curve 
(AUC).
RESULTS: 57 effective and important features were selected as input features by 
GAs with 99.78% ACC. The performance score of the models showed that the SVM 
with mixture kernels model performed best among the other algorithms (ACC = 
92.1%, SE = 92.6%, SP = 97.3%, and AUC = 0.931).
CONCLUSION: According to the evaluation criteria values, the best model for 
diagnosing ADHD from BD has been suggested. This approach can be useful in 
diagnosis, psychological, and psychiatric interventions.

Copyright: © 2025 Journal of Research in Medical Sciences.

DOI: 10.4103/jrms.jrms_406_24
PMCID: PMC12646346
PMID: 41306624

Conflict of interest statement: There are no conflicts of interest.


338. Cogn Neuropsychol. 2014;31(3):266-86. doi: 10.1080/02643294.2013.879443. Epub 
2014 Feb 5.

Losing control of your languages: a case study.

Calabria M(1), Marne P, Romero-Pinel L, Juncadella M, Costa A.

Author information:
(1)a Departament de Tecnologies de la Informació i les Comunicacions, Center for 
Brain and Cognition , Universitat Pompeu Fabra , Barcelona , Spain.

Bilingual speakers are usually quite good at restricting their lexicalization 
output to the desired language while preventing all sorts of language intrusions 
from the language not in use. However, brain damage can affect these abilities 
of language control, leading to striking and flagrant linguistic behaviours, 
such as pathological language mixing (pLM) and pathological switching (pLS). In 
this paper we report the performance of a Catalan-Spanish bilingual individual 
(R.R.T.) who, due to a neuroinflammatory disease and subcortical lesions, shows 
pLS. We tested R.R.T. in several tasks of language production and control, such 
as picture naming (objects and actions), word translation, blocked naming, and 
language switching task. R.R.T. was also tested in executive control (EC) tasks, 
such as task switching and a flanker task. We found several interesting results. 
First, cross-language intrusions were present much more frequently when R.R.T. 
was asked to speak in her first (and dominant) language (Catalan) than when she 
was asked to do so in the nondominant language (Spanish). Second, the results 
provide evidence suggesting that damage to certain subcortical structures may 
lead to problems in controlling the language output during verbalization in 
bilingual speakers. Third, we observed that R.R.T. seemed to show more 
difficulties in language control with verbs. Fourth, R.R.T. showed impaired 
performance compared to controls in both task switching and a flanker task. The 
results are discussed in relation to other findings of pLM and pLS in published 
single-case reports and in relation to EC deficits.

DOI: 10.1080/02643294.2013.879443
PMID: 24499376 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


339. Neuroimage. 2014 Apr 1;89:235-43. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2013.12.018. Epub 
2013 Dec 19.

Alpha activity reflects individual abilities to adapt to the environment.

Horschig JM(1), Jensen O(2), van Schouwenburg MR(3), Cools R(4), Bonnefond M(1).

Author information:
(1)Radboud University Nijmegen, Donders Institute for Brain, Behaviour and 
Cognition, 6525 EN Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(2)Radboud University Nijmegen, Donders Institute for Brain, Behaviour and 
Cognition, 6525 EN Nijmegen, The Netherlands. Electronic address: 
o.jensen@donders.ru.nl.
(3)Radboud University Nijmegen, Donders Institute for Brain, Behaviour and 
Cognition, 6525 EN Nijmegen, The Netherlands; Radboud University Nijmegen 
Medical Centre, Department of Psychiatry, 6500 HB Nijmegen, The Netherlands; 
Department of Neurology, University of California, San Francisco, CA 94158, USA.
(4)Radboud University Nijmegen, Donders Institute for Brain, Behaviour and 
Cognition, 6525 EN Nijmegen, The Netherlands; Radboud University Nijmegen 
Medical Centre, Department of Psychiatry, 6500 HB Nijmegen, The Netherlands.

Recent findings suggest that oscillatory alpha activity (7-13Hz) is associated 
with functional inhibition of sensory regions by filtering incoming information. 
Accordingly the alpha power in visual regions varies in anticipation of 
upcoming, predictable stimuli which has consequences for visual processing and 
subsequent behavior. In covert spatial attention studies it has been 
demonstrated that performance correlates with the adaptation of alpha power in 
response to explicit spatial cueing. However it remains unknown whether such an 
adaptation also occurs in response to implicit statistical properties of a task. 
In a covert attention switching paradigm, we here show evidence that individuals 
differ on how they adapt to implicit statistical properties of the task. 
Subjects whose behavioral performance reflects the implicit change in switch 
trial likelihood show strong adjustment of anticipatory alpha power 
lateralization. Most importantly, the stronger the behavioral adjustment to the 
switch trial likelihood was, the stronger the adjustment of anticipatory 
posterior alpha lateralization. We conclude that anticipatory spatial attention 
is reflected in the distribution of posterior alpha band power which is 
predictive of individual detection performance in response to the implicit 
statistical properties of the task.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2013.12.018
PMID: 24361665 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


340. Exp Gerontol. 2022 Aug;165:111853. doi: 10.1016/j.exger.2022.111853. Epub 2022 
May 26.

The effect of casein hydrolysate intake on cerebral neural regulation during 
cognitive tasks in the elderly.

Kimura K(1), Saito N(2), Nakamura H(2), Takeda Y(3).

Author information:
(1)School of Engineering, Department of Humanities and School Sciences, Tokyo 
Denki University, 5 Senju-Asahi-cho, Adachi-ku, Tokyo 120-8551, Japan. 
Electronic address: kimura@cck.dendai.ac.jp.
(2)Wellness & Nutrition Science Institute, R&D Division, Morinaga Milk Industry 
Co., Ltd., 1-83, 5-Chome, Higashihara, Zama-City, Kanagawa-Pref. 252-8583, 
Japan.
(3)Food Research & Development Institute, R&D Division, Morinaga Milk Industry 
Co., Ltd., 1-83, 5-Chome, Higashihara, Zama-City, Kanagawa-Pref. 252-8583, 
Japan.

Human and animal studies have shown that casein peptide (casein hydrolysate) has 
positive effects on cognitive function. This double-blind randomized controlled 
study aimed to investigate whether single ingestion of casein peptide could 
affect cognitive function (executive function) and cognitive neural activity in 
healthy older adults. We assigned 47 participants to one of the three dietary 
supplements as follows: casein peptide (TMP, n = 15), casein (TMC, n = 16), and 
indigestible dextrin (TMF, n = 16). Dietary supplements were ingested 30 min 
before starting the experiment; moreover, neural activity while performing the 
task-switching reaction time (SWT) trial was assessed through functional 
magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI). Additionally, we used a visual analog scale 
(VAS) test to assess the pre- and post-test feeling and mood. Regarding the 
parameters of the SWT trial, there were no significant among-group differences 
in the reaction time, accuracy rate, and %SwitchCost. Contrastingly, the fMRI 
experiment revealed among-group differences in the main effects in the medial 
frontal gyrus, Supplementary motor cortex (SMC), posterior cingulate gyrus 
(PCg), and amygdala (Amyg). Specifically, there was a significant decrease in 
the neural activities in the SMC and PCg in the TMP group than in the other two 
groups. Moreover, there was a significant increase in the neural activity in the 
Amyg in the TMP group compared with the TMF, but not the TMC, group. 
Furthermore, the VAS score was significantly higher in the TMP group than in the 
other two groups. There were no recorded adverse outcomes. Our findings 
suggested that TMP ingestion by older adults could temporarily suppress 
complementary neural activity in specific brain regions involved in executive 
functions, as well as default mode network activity, which could improve 
cognitive neural activities.

Copyright © 2022 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.exger.2022.111853
PMID: 35643358 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


341. Neuroimage. 2015 Mar;108:435-40. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2014.12.068. Epub 
2015 Jan 3.

Electrophysiological evidence for retrieval mode immediately after a task 
switch.

Evans LH(1), Williams AN(2), Wilding EL(2).

Author information:
(1)Cardiff University Brain Research Imaging Centre (CUBRIC), School of 
Psychology, Cardiff University, Cardiff CF10 3AT, Wales, UK. Electronic address: 
EvansLH@cardiff.ac.uk.
(2)Cardiff University Brain Research Imaging Centre (CUBRIC), School of 
Psychology, Cardiff University, Cardiff CF10 3AT, Wales, UK.

It has been suggested that retrieving episodic information can involve adopting 
a cognitive state or set: retrieval mode. In a series of studies, an 
event-related potential (ERP) index of retrieval mode has been identified in 
designs which cue participants on a trial-by-trial basis to switch between 
preparing for and then completing an episodic or non-episodic retrieval task. 
However, a confound in these studies is that along with task type the content of 
what is to be retrieved has varied. Here we examined whether the ERP index of 
retrieval mode remains when the contents of an episodic and non-episodic task 
are highly similar - both requiring a location judgement. In the episodic task 
participants indicated the screen location where words had been shown in a prior 
study phase (left/right/new); whereas in the perceptual task they indicated the 
current screen location of the word (top/middle/bottom). Consistent with 
previous studies the ERPs elicited while participants prepared for episodic 
retrieval were more positive-going at right-frontal sites than when they 
prepared for the perceptual task. This index was observed, however, on the first 
trial after participants had switched tasks, rather than on the second trial, as 
has been observed previously. Potential reasons for this are discussed, 
including the critical manipulation of similarity in contents between tasks, as 
well as the use of a predictable cue sequence.

Copyright © 2015. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2014.12.068
PMCID: PMC4334665
PMID: 25562822 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


342. Biol Psychiatry Cogn Neurosci Neuroimaging. 2025 Dec 4:S2451-9022(25)00367-2. 
doi: 10.1016/j.bpsc.2025.11.010. Online ahead of print.

Cerebellar Functional Alterations During Executive Functioning Are Associated 
With General Psychopathology in a Cross-Diagnostic Sample.

Romer AL(1), Hosterman G(2), Kumar P(3), Pizzagalli DA(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State 
University, Blacksburg, Virginia; Center for Depression, Anxiety and Stress 
Research, McLean Hospital, Belmont, Massachusetts. Electronic address: 
aromer@vt.edu.
(2)Department of Psychology, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State 
University, Blacksburg, Virginia.
(3)Center for Depression, Anxiety and Stress Research, McLean Hospital, Belmont, 
Massachusetts; Harvard Medical School, Belmont, Massachusetts.
(4)Center for Depression, Anxiety and Stress Research, McLean Hospital, Belmont, 
Massachusetts; Harvard Medical School, Belmont, Massachusetts; Noel Drury, M.D. 
Institute for Translational Depression Discoveries, University of California, 
Irvine, Irvine, California.

BACKGROUND: Accumulating evidence points to the cerebellum's role in executive 
functioning (EF) and transdiagnostic psychopathology. A general psychopathology 
p-factor, capturing shared variation across mental disorders, has been 
associated with EF deficits and structural alterations within the posterior 
cerebellum. One hypothesis is that the cerebellum contributes to general 
psychopathology because of its role in executive dysfunctions.
METHODS: To test this hypothesis, we used functional magnetic resonance imaging 
(fMRI) data from the University of California, Los Angeles Consortium for 
Neuropsychiatric Phenomics study including 257 adults (ages 21-50 years) who met 
diagnostic criteria for schizophrenia, bipolar disorder, or 
attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder or were healthy control participants. 
We examined relationships between p-factor scores and cerebellar activation 
across participants during 3 fMRI tasks of working memory (spatial capacity), 
cognitive flexibility (task switching), and response inhibition (stop signal). 
Specificity analyses of cerebellar activation associated with internalizing, 
externalizing, and thought disorder factor scores were also conducted.
RESULTS: Robust posterior cerebellar activation was identified during all 3 fMRI 
tasks. Higher p-factor scores were associated with poorer EF performance, 
greater activation of cerebellar crus I/II and lobule VIIIA/B with increasing 
working memory difficulty, and greater activation of lobules VI and VIIIA/B 
during successful inhibition (R2 range = 0.078-0.108). Associations between 
cerebellar activation and internalizing, externalizing, and thought disorder 
factor scores were largely overlapping with associations with the p-factor.
CONCLUSIONS: These novel results identify functional alterations within the 
posterior cerebellum during EF in individuals high in general psychopathology. 
Greater activation of the posterior cerebellum may be a transdiagnostic 
dysfunction reflecting inefficient information processing during EF present 
across disorder categories.

Copyright © 2025 Society of Biological Psychiatry. Published by Elsevier Inc. 
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bpsc.2025.11.010
PMCID: PMC12716028
PMID: 41352431


343. Eur J Neurosci. 2002 Oct;16(8):1609-19. doi: 10.1046/j.1460-9568.2002.02212.x.

The roles of the cerebellum and basal ganglia in timing and error prediction.

Dreher JC(1), Grafman J.

Author information:
(1)Cognitive Neuroscience Section, National Institute of Neurological Disorder 
and Stroke, Building 10, Room 5C205, MSC 1440 Bethesda, Maryland 20892-1440, 
USA.

Recent evidence that the cerebellum and the basal ganglia are activated during 
the performance of cognitive and attention tasks challenges the prevailing view 
of their primary function in motor control. The specific roles of the basal 
ganglia and the cerebellum in cognition, however, have been difficult to 
identify. At least three functional hypotheses regarding their roles have been 
proposed. The first hypothesis suggests that their main function is to switch 
attentional set. The second hypothesis states that they provide error signals 
regarding stimuli or rewards. The third hypothesis is that they operate as an 
internal timing system, providing a precise representation of temporal 
information. Using functional magnetic resonance imaging, we tested these three 
hypotheses using a task-switching experiment with a 2 x 2 factorial design 
varying timing (random relative to fixed) and task order (unpredictable relative 
to predictable). This design allowed us to test whether switching between tasks, 
timing irregularity and/or task order unpredictability activate the basal 
ganglia and/or the cerebellum. We show that the cerebellum is primarily 
activated with timing irregularity while the anterior striatum is activated with 
task order unpredictability, supporting their distinctive roles in two forms of 
readjustment. Task order unpredictability alone, independent of reward delivery, 
is sufficient to induce striatal activation. In addition, activation of the 
cerebellum and basal ganglia were not specific to switching attention because 
these regions were both activated during switching between tasks and during the 
simultaneous maintenance of two tasks without switching between them.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1460-9568.2002.02212.x
PMID: 12405975 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


344. J Cogn Neurosci. 2005 Sep;17(9):1367-75. doi: 10.1162/0898929054985400.

Who comes first? The role of the prefrontal and parietal cortex in cognitive 
control.

Brass M(1), Ullsperger M, Knoesche TR, von Cramon DY, Phillips NA.

Author information:
(1)Max Planck Institute for Human Cognitive and Brain Sciences, Leipzig, 
Germany. brass@cbs.mpg.de

Cognitive control processes enable us to adjust our behavior to changing 
environmental demands. Although neuropsychological studies suggest that the 
critical cortical region for cognitive control is the prefrontal cortex, 
neuro-imaging studies have emphasized the interplay of prefrontal and parietal 
cortices. This raises the fundamental question about the different contributions 
of prefrontal and parietal areas in cognitive control. It was assumed that the 
prefrontal cortex biases processing in posterior brain regions. This assumption 
leads to the hypothesis that neural activity in the prefrontal cortex should 
precede parietal activity in cognitive control. The present study tested this 
assumption by combining results from functional magnetic resonance imaging 
(fMRI) providing high spatial resolution and event-related potentials (ERPs) to 
gain high temporal resolution. We collected ERP data using a modified 
task-switching paradigm. In this paradigm, a situation where the same task was 
indicated by two different cues was compared with a situation where two cues 
indicated different tasks. Only the latter condition required updating of the 
task set. Task-set updating was associated with a midline negative ERP 
deflection peaking around 470 msec. We placed dipoles in regions activated in a 
previous fMRI study that used the same paradigm (left inferior frontal junction, 
right inferior frontal gyrus, right parietal cortex) and fitted their directions 
and magnitudes to the ERP effect. The frontal dipoles contributed to the ERP 
effect earlier than the parietal dipole, providing support for the view that the 
prefrontal cortex is involved in updating of general task representations and 
biases relevant stimulus-response associations in the parietal cortex.

DOI: 10.1162/0898929054985400
PMID: 16197690 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


345. J Neurosci. 2017 Aug 16;37(33):7893-7905. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3289-16.2017. 
Epub 2017 Jul 17.

Hierarchically Organized Medial Frontal Cortex-Basal Ganglia Loops Selectively 
Control Task- and Response-Selection.

Korb FM(1), Jiang J(2), King JA(2), Egner T(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Center for Cognitive Neuroscience and franziska.maria.korb@gmail.com 
tobias.egner@duke.edu.
(2)Center for Cognitive Neuroscience and.
(3)Department of Psychology and Neuroscience, Duke University, Durham, North 
Carolina 27708.

Adaptive behavior requires context-sensitive configuration of task-sets that 
specify time-varying stimulus-response mappings. Intriguingly, response time 
costs associated with changing task-sets and motor responses are known to be 
strongly interactive: switch costs at the task level are small in the presence 
of a response-switch but large when accompanied by a response-repetition, and 
vice versa for response-switch costs. The reasons behind this well known 
interdependence between task- and response-level control processes are currently 
not well understood. Here, we formalized and tested a model assuming a 
hierarchical organization of superordinate task-set and subordinate response-set 
selection processes to account for this effect. The model was found to 
successfully explain the full range of behavioral task- and response-switch 
costs across first and second order trial transitions. Using functional magnetic 
resonance imaging (fMRI) in healthy humans, we then characterized the neural 
circuitry mediating these effects. We found that presupplementary motor area 
(preSMA) activity tracked task-set control costs, SMA activity tracked 
response-set control costs, and basal ganglia (BG) activity mirrored the 
interaction between task- and response-set regulation processes that 
characterized participants' response times. A subsequent fMRI-guided 
transcranial magnetic stimulation experiment confirmed dissociable roles of the 
preSMA and SMA in determining response costs. Together, these data provide 
evidence for a hierarchical organization of posterior medial frontal cortex and 
its interaction with the BG, where a superordinate preSMA-BG loop establishes 
task-set selection, which imposes a (unidirectional) constraint on a subordinate 
SMA-BG loop that determines response-selection, resulting in the characteristic 
interdependence in task- and response-switch costs in behavior.SIGNIFICANCE 
STATEMENT The ability to use context-sensitive task-sets to guide our responses 
is central to human adaptive behavior. Task and response selection are strongly 
interactive: it is more difficult to repeat a response in the context of a 
changing task-set, and vice versa. However, the neurocognitive architecture 
giving rise to this interdependence is currently not understood. Here we use 
modeling, neuroimaging, and noninvasive neurostimulation to show that this 
phenomenon derives from a hierarchical organization of posterior medial frontal 
cortex and its interaction with the basal ganglia, where a more anterior 
corticostriatal loop establishes task-set selection, which constrains a more 
posterior loop responsible for response-selection. These data provide a neural 
explanation for a key behavioral signature of human cognitive control.

Copyright © 2017 the authors 0270-6474/17/377893-13$15.00/0.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3289-16.2017
PMCID: PMC5559764
PMID: 28716966 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


346. RETRACTED ARTICLE

J Neurosci. 2010 Aug 4;30(31):10294-305. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2052-10.2010.

Motivated cognitive control: reward incentives modulate preparatory neural 
activity during task-switching.

Savine AC(1), Braver TS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Washington University, St. Louis, Missouri 63139, 
USA. acsavine@artsci.wustl.edu

Retraction in
    J Neurosci. 2013 May 15;33(20):8922. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1696-13.2013.

Comment in
    . 2013 Mar 15:NOT-OD-13-049.
    Fed Regist. 2013 Mar 7;78(45):14797-14798.

It is increasingly appreciated that executive control processes need to be 
understood in terms of motivational as well as cognitive mechanisms. The current 
study examined the impact of performance-contingent reward incentives (monetary 
bonuses) on neural activity dynamics during cued task-switching performance. 
Behavioral measures indicated that performance was improved and task-switch 
costs selectively reduced on incentive trials. Trial-by-trial fluctuations in 
incentive value were associated with activation in reward-related brain regions 
(dopaminergic midbrain, paracingulate cortex) and also modulated the dynamics of 
switch-selective activation in the brain cognitive control network. Within 
lateral prefrontal cortex (PFC), both additive (inferior frontal junction) and 
interactive [dorsolateral PFC (DLPFC)] incentive effects were observed. In 
DLPFC, incentive modulation of activation predicted task-switching behavioral 
performance, but with hemispherically dissociable effects. Furthermore, in left 
DLPFC, incentive modulation specifically enhanced task-cue-related activation, 
and this activation in turn predicted that the trial would be subsequently 
rewarded (because of optimal performance). The results suggest that motivational 
incentives have a selective effect on brain regions that subserve cognitive 
control processes during task-switching and, moreover, that one mechanism of 
effect might be the enhancement of cue-related task preparation within left 
DLPFC.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2052-10.2010
PMCID: PMC2935640
PMID: 20685974 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


347. Neuroimage. 2019 Apr 1;189:130-140. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2019.01.022. Epub 
2019 Jan 10.

Frontal theta predicts specific cognitive control-induced behavioural changes 
beyond general reaction time slowing.

Cooper PS(1), Karayanidis F(2), McKewen M(3), McLellan-Hall S(4), Wong ASW(2), 
Skippen P(3), Cavanagh JF(5).

Author information:
(1)Functional Neuroimaging Laboratory, School of Psychology, University of 
Newcastle, Australia; Priority Research Centre for Stroke and Brain Injury, 
University of Newcastle, Australia; Priority Research Centre for Brain and 
Mental Health, University of Newcastle, Australia; Hunter Medical Research 
Institute, Newcastle, Australia. Electronic address: 
patrick.cooper@newcastle.edu.au.
(2)Functional Neuroimaging Laboratory, School of Psychology, University of 
Newcastle, Australia; Priority Research Centre for Stroke and Brain Injury, 
University of Newcastle, Australia; Hunter Medical Research Institute, 
Newcastle, Australia.
(3)Functional Neuroimaging Laboratory, School of Psychology, University of 
Newcastle, Australia; Priority Research Centre for Brain and Mental Health, 
University of Newcastle, Australia; Hunter Medical Research Institute, 
Newcastle, Australia.
(4)Functional Neuroimaging Laboratory, School of Psychology, University of 
Newcastle, Australia.
(5)Department of Psychology, University of New Mexico, USA.

Comment in
    Trends Neurosci. 2019 May;42(5):307-309. doi: 10.1016/j.tins.2019.02.006.

Investigations into the neurophysiological underpinnings of control suggest that 
frontal theta activity is increased with the need for control. However, these 
studies typically show this link by reporting associations between increased 
theta and RT slowing - a process that is contemporaneous with cognitive control 
but does not strictly reflect the specific use of control. In this study, we 
assessed frontal theta responses that underpinned the switch cost in task 
switching - a specific index of cognitive control that does not rely exclusively 
on RT slowing. Here, we utilised a single-trial regression approach to assess 1) 
how cognitive control demands beyond simple RT slowing were linked to midfrontal 
theta and 2) whether midfrontal theta effects remained stable over time. In a 
large cohort that included a longitudinal subsample, we found that midfrontal 
theta was modulated by switch costs, with enhanced theta power when preparing to 
switch vs. repeating a task. These effects were reliable after a two-year 
interval (Cronbach's α.39-0.74). In contrast, we found that trial-by-trial 
modulations of midfrontal theta power predicted the size of the switch cost - so 
that switch trials with increased theta produced smaller switch costs. 
Interestingly, these relationships between theta and behaviour were less stable 
over time (Cronbach's α 0-0.61), with participants first using both delta and 
theta bands to influence behaviour whereas after two years only theta 
associations with behaviour remained. Together, these findings suggest 
midfrontal theta supports the need for control beyond simple RT slowing and 
reveal that midfrontal theta effects remain relatively stable over time.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2019.01.022
PMCID: PMC7664162
PMID: 30639331 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


348. Int J Eat Disord. 2025 Nov 11. doi: 10.1002/eat.24599. Online ahead of print.

Shared Versus Unique Features of Neural Activation During Cognitive Flexibility 
Across Restrictive Eating Disorder Presentations.

Romer AL(1)(2), Breithaupt L(3)(4)(5)(6), Slattery M(5)(7), Petterway F(5)(7), 
Lindman L(5)(7), Scott J(2)(8), Lauze M(5)(7), Cravitz M(5)(7), Poon Z(4), 
Seenivasa S(5)(6), Naticchia S(5)(9), Javaras KN(3)(10)(11), Alperovitz 
D(10)(12)(13), Thomas JJ(3)(4)(5)(13), Lawson EA(5)(7)(13), Pizzagalli 
DA(2)(3)(14), Plessow F(15), Kumar P(2)(3), Misra M(7)(16), Eddy 
KT(3)(4)(5)(17).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State 
University, Blacksburg, Virginia, USA.
(2)Center for Depression, Anxiety, and Stress Research, McLean Hospital, 
Belmont, Massachusetts, USA.
(3)Department of Psychiatry, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(4)Eating Disorders Clinical and Research Program, Department of Psychiatry, 
Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(5)Mass General Brigham Multidisciplinary Eating Disorders Research 
Collaborative, Mass General Brigham, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(6)Psychiatry Neuroimaging Laboratory, Department of Psychiatry, Brigham and 
Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(7)Neuroendocrine Unit, Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital 
and Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(8)Kaiser Permanente Bernard J. Tyson School of Medicine, Pasadena, California, 
USA.
(9)Department of Neuroscience, Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts, 
USA.
(10)Division of Women's Mental Health, McLean Hospital, Belmont, Massachusetts, 
USA.
(11)Department of Epidemiology, Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health, 
Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(12)Klarman Eating Disorders Center, McLean Hospital, Belmont, Massachusetts, 
USA.
(13)Department of Medicine, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(14)McLean Imaging Center, McLean Hospital, Belmont, Massachusetts, USA.
(15)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Weill Institute for 
Neurosciences, University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, 
California, USA.
(16)Division of Pediatric Endocrinology, University of Virginia, 
Charlottesville, Virginia, USA.
(17)Division of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, AMC Department of Psychiatry, 
Massachusetts General Brigham, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Restrictive eating disorders (EDs), including anorexia nervosa (AN) 
and atypical AN (Atyp-AN), are often associated with cognitive rigidity that can 
impede treatment. The dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (dlPFC) plays a central 
role in cognitive control, but it remains unclear whether its activation during 
cognitive flexibility will differ across restrictive ED presentations.
METHOD: Eighty-seven females with restrictive EDs (aged 14-35) (AN: n = 31; 
atyp-AN with history of AN [hx-AN]: n = 33; atyp-AN without history of AN 
[Atyp-AN]: n = 23) completed a task-switching paradigm during functional 
magnetic resonance imaging. We examined dlPFC activation during sustained 
(task-switching vs. completing a single task) and transient control (switching 
between task rules vs. repeating the same rule), testing for group differences 
and symptom associations.
RESULTS: The AN group showed a greater difference in left dlPFC activation 
during task switching vs. the single task compared to the hx-AN and Atyp-AN 
groups, driven by reduced activation during the single task condition. All 
groups showed similar increases in dlPFC activation during task switching and no 
differences in task performance. Across all participants, higher dlPFC 
activation during task switching vs. single task was associated with greater 
restraint symptoms.
DISCUSSION: These novel findings identified shared versus unique neural features 
of sustained and transient control across restrictive ED groups. Heightened 
dlPFC activation during transient control associated with restraint may 
represent a transdiagnostic feature shared across restrictive EDs. 
Alternatively, reduced dlPFC activation during the low-demand, single-task 
condition in those with typical, but not atypical AN, may reflect a difference 
in sustained control, with implications for tailoring interventions to distinct 
restrictive ED presentations.

© 2025 The Author(s). International Journal of Eating Disorders published by 
Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/eat.24599
PMID: 41216793


349. Eur Psychiatry. 2021 Mar 3;64(1):e27. doi: 10.1192/j.eurpsy.2021.15.

Associations of subclinical autistic-like traits with brain structural variation 
using diffusion tensor imaging and voxel-based morphometry.

Schröder Y(1), Hohmann DM(1)(2), Meller T(1)(2), Evermann U(1)(2), Pfarr 
JK(1)(2), Jansen A(1)(2)(3), Kamp-Becker I(2)(4), Grezellschak S(1)(2), Nenadić 
I(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Cognitive Neuropsychiatry Lab, Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, 
Philipps-University Marburg/Marburg University Hospital-UKGM, Marburg, Germany.
(2)Center for Mind, Brain and Behavior (CMBB), Hans-Meerwein-Str. 6, 
35032Marburg, Germany.
(3)Core-Facility BrainImaging, School of Medicine, Philipps University Marburg, 
Marburg, Germany.
(4)Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, Psychosomatics and 
Psychotherapy, Philipps-University Marburg/Marburg University Hospital-UKGM, 
Marburg, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Previous case-control studies of autistic spectrum disorder (ASD) 
have identified altered brain structure such as altered frontal and temporal 
cortex volumes, or decreased fractional anisotropy (FA) within the inferior 
fronto-occipital fasciculus in patients. It remains unclear whether subclinical 
autistic-like traits might also be related to variation in these brain 
structures.
METHODS: In this study, we analyzed magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) data of 250 
psychiatrically healthy subjects phenotyped for subclinical autistic-like traits 
using the Autism Spectrum Quotient (AQ). For data analysis, we used voxel-based 
morphometry of T1-MRIs (Computational Anatomy Toolbox) and tract-based spatial 
statistics for diffusion tensor imaging data.
RESULTS: AQ attention switching subscale correlated negatively with FA values in 
the bilateral uncinate fasciculus as well as the bilateral inferior 
fronto-occipital fasciculus. Higher AQ attention switching subscale scores were 
associated with increased mean diffusivity and radial diffusivity values in the 
uncinate fasciculus, while axial diffusivity values within this tract show a 
negative correlation. AQ attention to detail subscale correlated positively with 
gray matter volume in the right pre- and postcentral gyrus.
CONCLUSIONS: We demonstrate that individuals with higher levels of 
autism-spectrum-like features show decreased white matter integrity in tracts 
associated with higher-level visual processing and increased cortical volume in 
areas linked to movement sequencing and working memory. Our results resemble 
regional brain structure alterations found in individuals with ASD. This offers 
opportunities to further understand the etiology and pathogenesis of the 
disorder and shows a subclinical continuum perspective.

DOI: 10.1192/j.eurpsy.2021.15
PMCID: PMC8080214
PMID: 33653433 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to 
declare.


350. Cereb Cortex. 2001 Jan;11(1):85-92. doi: 10.1093/cercor/11.1.85.

Dissociable mechanisms of attentional control within the human prefrontal 
cortex.

Nagahama Y(1), Okada T, Katsumi Y, Hayashi T, Yamauchi H, Oyanagi C, Konishi J, 
Fukuyama H, Shibasaki H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Brain Pathophysiology, Faculty of Medicine, Kyoto University, 
54 Shogoin Kawahara-cho, Sakyo, Kyoto 606-8507, Japan.

Neuropsychological tests that require shifting an attentional set, such as the 
Wisconsin Card Sorting Test, are sensitive to frontal lobe damage. Although 
little information is available for humans, an animal experiment suggested that 
different regions of the prefrontal cortex may contribute to set shifting 
behavior at different levels of processing. Behavioral studies also suggest that 
set shifting trials are more time consuming than non-set shifting trials (i.e. 
switch cost) and that this may be underpinned by differences at the neural 
level. We determined whether there were differential neural responses associated 
with two different levels of shifting behavior, that of reversal of 
stimulus-response associations within a perceptual dimension or that of shifting 
an attentional set between different perceptual dimensions. Neural activity in 
the antero-dorsal prefrontal cortex increased only in attentional set shifting, 
in which switch costs were significant. Activity in the postero-ventral 
prefrontal cortex increased not only in set shifting but also in reversing 
stimulus-response associations, in which switch costs were absent. We conclude 
that these distinct regions in the human prefrontal cortex provide different 
levels of attention control in response selection. Thus, the antero-dorsal 
prefrontal cortex may be critical for higher order control of attention, i.e. 
attentional set shifting, whereas the postero-ventral area may be related to a 
lower level of shift, i.e. reorganizing stimulus-response associations.

DOI: 10.1093/cercor/11.1.85
PMID: 11113037 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


351. J Cogn Neurosci. 2012 Dec;24(12):2385-99. doi: 10.1162/jocn_a_00286. Epub 2012 
Aug 20.

Prefrontal cortical mechanisms underlying individual differences in cognitive 
flexibility and stability.

Armbruster DJ(1), Ueltzhöffer K, Basten U, Fiebach CJ.

Author information:
(1)Goethe University Frankfurt am Main, Frankfurt am Main, Germany. 
armbruster@psych.uni-frankfurt.de

The pFC is critical for cognitive flexibility (i.e., our ability to flexibly 
adjust behavior to changing environmental demands), but also for cognitive 
stability (i.e., our ability to follow behavioral plans in the face of 
distraction). Behavioral research suggests that individuals differ in their 
cognitive flexibility and stability, and neurocomputational theories of working 
memory relate this variability to the concept of attractor stability in 
recurrently connected neural networks. We introduce a novel task paradigm to 
simultaneously assess flexible switching between task rules (cognitive 
flexibility) and task performance in the presence of irrelevant distractors 
(cognitive stability) and to furthermore assess the individual "spontaneous 
switching rate" in response to ambiguous stimuli to quantify the individual 
dispositional cognitive flexibility in a theoretically motivated way (i.e., as a 
proxy for attractor stability). Using fMRI in healthy human participants, a 
common network consisting of parietal and frontal areas was found for task 
switching and distractor inhibition. More flexible persons showed reduced 
activation and reduced functional coupling in frontal areas, including the 
inferior frontal junction, during task switching. Most importantly, the 
individual spontaneous switching rate antagonistically affected the functional 
coupling between inferior frontal junction and the superior frontal gyrus during 
task switching and distractor inhibition, respectively, indicating that 
individual differences in cognitive flexibility and stability are indeed related 
to a common prefrontal neural mechanism. We suggest that the concept of 
attractor stability of prefrontal working memory networks is a meaningful model 
for individual differences in cognitive stability versus flexibility.

DOI: 10.1162/jocn_a_00286
PMID: 22905818 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


352. Neuropsychologia. 2019 Sep;132:107131. doi: 
10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2019.107131. Epub 2019 Jul 1.

Distinct structural correlates of the dominant and nondominant languages in 
bilinguals with Alzheimer's disease (AD).

Smirnov DS(1), Stasenko A(2), Salmon DP(3), Galasko D(3), Brewer JB(3), Gollan 
TH(4).

Author information:
(1)Shiley-Marcos Alzheimer's Disease Research Center, Department of 
Neurosciences, University of California, San Diego, United States. Electronic 
address: dsmirnov@ucsd.edu.
(2)San Diego State University/University of California, San Diego Joint Doctoral 
Program in Clinical Psychology, United States; Department of Psychiatry, 
University of California, San Diego, United States.
(3)Shiley-Marcos Alzheimer's Disease Research Center, Department of 
Neurosciences, University of California, San Diego, United States.
(4)Department of Psychiatry, University of California, San Diego, United States.

Structural adaptations in brain regions involved in domain-general cognitive 
control are associated with life-long bilingualism and may contribute to the 
executive function advantage of bilinguals over monolinguals. To the degree that 
these adaptations support bilingualism, their disruption by Alzheimer's disease 
(AD) may compromise the ability to maintain proficiency in two languages, 
particularly in the less proficient, or nondominant, language that has greater 
control demands. The present study assessed this possibility in Spanish-English 
bilinguals with AD (n = 21) and cognitively normal controls (n = 30) by 
examining the brain correlates of dominant versus nondominant language 
performance on the Multilingual Naming Test (MINT), adjusting for age and 
education. There were no significant structural correlates of naming performance 
for either language in controls. In patients with AD, dominant language MINT 
performance was associated with cortical thickness of the entorhinal cortex and 
middle temporal gyrus, consistent with previous findings of temporal atrophy and 
related decline of naming abilities in AD. Nondominant language MINT 
performance, in contrast, was correlated with thickness of the left caudal 
anterior cingulate cortex (ACC), a central cognitive control region involved in 
error monitoring and task switching. The relationship between naming in the 
nondominant language and ACC in patients with AD but not in controls may reflect 
increased reliance on the ACC for nondominant language use in the face of 
atrophy of other control network components. The results are consistent with the 
possibility that the increased burden nondominant language use places on 
cognitive control systems compromised in AD may account for faster nondominant 
than dominant language decline in AD.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2019.107131
PMCID: PMC6702045
PMID: 31271821 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations of Interest DSS reports no 
disclosures. AS reports no disclosures. DPS serves as a consultant for Aptinx, 
Inc. and Biogen MA, Inc. DG serves as editor for Alzheimer’s Research and 
Therapy, and as a paid consultant on Data Safety Monitoring Boards for Pfizer, 
Inc., Elan, Inc., and Balance Pharmaceuticals, Inc. JBB has served on advisory 
boards for Elan, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Avanir, Novartis, Genentech, and Eli 
Lilly and holds stock options in CorTechs Labs, Inc and Human Longevity, Inc. 
THG reports no disclosures.


353. PLoS One. 2011 Jan 14;6(1):e16093. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0016093.

Predicting individuals' learning success from patterns of pre-learning MRI 
activity.

Vo LT(1), Walther DB, Kramer AF, Erickson KI, Boot WR, Voss MW, Prakash RS, Lee 
H, Fabiani M, Gratton G, Simons DJ, Sutton BP, Wang MY.

Author information:
(1)Beckman Institute, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, 
Illinois, United States of America.

Performance in most complex cognitive and psychomotor tasks improves with 
training, yet the extent of improvement varies among individuals. Is it possible 
to forecast the benefit that a person might reap from training? Several 
behavioral measures have been used to predict individual differences in task 
improvement, but their predictive power is limited. Here we show that individual 
differences in patterns of time-averaged T2*-weighted MRI images in the dorsal 
striatum recorded at the initial stage of training predict subsequent learning 
success in a complex video game with high accuracy. These predictions explained 
more than half of the variance in learning success among individuals, suggesting 
that individual differences in neuroanatomy or persistent physiology predict 
whether and to what extent people will benefit from training in a complex task. 
Surprisingly, predictions from white matter were highly accurate, while voxels 
in the gray matter of the dorsal striatum did not contain any information about 
future training success. Prediction accuracy was higher in the anterior than the 
posterior half of the dorsal striatum. The link between trainability and the 
time-averaged T2*-weighted signal in the dorsal striatum reaffirms the role of 
this part of the basal ganglia in learning and executive functions, such as 
task-switching and task coordination processes. The ability to predict who will 
benefit from training by using neuroimaging data collected in the early training 
phase may have far-reaching implications for the assessment of candidates for 
specific training programs as well as the study of populations that show 
deficiencies in learning new skills.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0016093
PMCID: PMC3021541
PMID: 21264257 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.


354. Hum Brain Mapp. 2006 Dec;27(12):973-93. doi: 10.1002/hbm.20237.

Progressive increase of frontostriatal brain activation from childhood to 
adulthood during event-related tasks of cognitive control.

Rubia K(1), Smith AB, Woolley J, Nosarti C, Heyman I, Taylor E, Brammer M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Child Psychiatry, Institute of Psychiatry, King's College, 
London, UK. k.rubia@iop.kcl.ac.uk

Higher cognitive inhibitory and attention functions have been shown to develop 
throughout adolescence, presumably concurrent with anatomical brain maturational 
changes. The relatively scarce developmental functional imaging literature on 
cognitive control, however, has been inconsistent with respect to the 
neurofunctional substrates of this cognitive development, finding either 
increased or decreased executive prefrontal function in the progression from 
childhood to adulthood. Such inconsistencies may be due to small subject numbers 
or confounds from age-related performance differences in block design functional 
MRI (fMRI). In this study, rapid, randomized, mixed-trial event-related fMRI was 
used to investigate developmental differences of the neural networks mediating a 
range of motor and cognitive inhibition functions in a sizeable number of 
adolescents and adults. Functional brain activation was compared between 
adolescents and adults during three different executive tasks measuring 
selective motor response inhibition (Go/no-go task), cognitive interference 
inhibition (Simon task), and attentional set shifting (Switch task). Adults 
compared with children showed increased brain activation in task-specific 
frontostriatal networks, including right orbital and mesial prefrontal cortex 
and caudate during the Go/no-go task, right mesial and inferior prefrontal 
cortex, parietal lobe, and putamen during the Switch task and left dorsolateral 
and inferior frontotemporoparietal regions and putamen during the Simon task. 
Whole-brain regression analyses with age across all subjects showed progressive 
age-related changes in similar and extended clusters of task-specific 
frontostriatal, frontotemporal, and frontoparietal networks. The findings 
suggest progressive maturation of task-specific frontostriatal and 
frontocortical networks for cognitive control functions in the transition from 
childhood to mid-adulthood.

(c) 2006 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/hbm.20237
PMCID: PMC6871373
PMID: 16683265 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


355. Psychol Med. 1996 May;26(3):591-603. doi: 10.1017/s0033291700035662.

Cognitive performance in tests sensitive to frontal lobe dysfunction in the 
elderly depressed.

Beats BC(1), Sahakian BJ, Levy R.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Psychiatry, London.

The paper reports the profile of impairment across a variety of cognitive 
functions with special emphasis on tests sensitive to frontal lobe dysfunction, 
in 24 elderly depressed patients during and on recovery from mood disorder, 
compared with 15 age- and sex-matched controls. Traditional neuropsychological 
tests and a recently developed battery of computerized tests (CANTAB) were used. 
Impairments were found in the depressed group compared to controls and to 
themselves on recovery across all domains examined. The depressed group showed 
deficits on visuospatial recognition memory, attentional shifting at the 
extra-dimensional shift stage and in measures of both processing and motor speed 
without impaired accuracy in a visual search task. Impairments were also found 
on a planning task with disproportionately increased numbers of moves needed for 
more difficult problems and evidence of both slowed motor response and increased 
processing time once the task was commenced. Performance on recovery improved 
across all tasks. Comparisons were made with the performance of patients 
suffering from dementia of the Alzheimer type (DAT) and Parkinson's disease on 
similar tests. Response latencies in test performance were found to correlate 
with the number of episodes of depression suffered and with ventricular size on 
CT scan, as measured by computerized planimetry. On recovery, residual 
depression scores correlated with latency of test performance and with 
ventricular brain ratio. The results, thus, show that depression in the elderly 
is associated with a significant degree of deficit on tests sensitive to 
frontostriatal dysfunction. Some of the deficits appear specific to depression 
and some do not remit following clinical recovery. However, these impairments 
have to be interpreted in the context of a broad profile of cognitive deficit.

DOI: 10.1017/s0033291700035662
PMID: 8733217 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


356. Brain Lang. 2012 Jul;122(1):55-63. doi: 10.1016/j.bandl.2012.04.008. Epub 2012 
May 9.

Cognitive control of language production in bilinguals involves a partly 
independent process within the domain-general cognitive control network: 
evidence from task-switching and electrical brain activity.

Magezi DA(1), Khateb A, Mouthon M, Spierer L, Annoni JM.

Author information:
(1)Neurology Unit, Department of Medicine, Faculty of Sciences, University of 
Fribourg, Switzerland.

In highly proficient, early bilinguals, behavioural studies of the cost of 
switching language or task suggest qualitative differences between language 
control and domain-general cognitive control. By contrast, several neuroimaging 
studies have shown an overlap of the brain areas involved in language control 
and domain-general cognitive control. The current study measured both 
behavioural responses and event-related potentials (ERPs) from bilinguals who 
performed picture naming in single- or mixed-language contexts, as well as an 
alphanumeric categorisation task in single- or mixed-task context. Analysis of 
switch costs during the mixed-context conditions showed qualitative differences 
between language control and domain-general cognitive control. A 2 × 2 ANOVA of 
the ERPs, with domain (linguistic, alphanumeric) and context (single, mixed) as 
within-participant factors, revealed a significant interaction, which also 
suggests a partly independent language-control mechanism. Source estimations 
revealed the neural basis of this mechanism to be in bilateral frontal-temporal 
areas.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bandl.2012.04.008
PMID: 22575667 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


357. Neurobiol Learn Mem. 2021 Nov;185:107509. doi: 10.1016/j.nlm.2021.107509. Epub 
2021 Aug 25.

Prefrontal cortex VAMP1 gene network moderates the effect of the early 
environment on cognitive flexibility in children.

Dalmaz C(1), Barth B(2), Pokhvisneva I(3), Wang Z(3), Patel S(3), Quillfeldt 
JA(4), Mendonça Filho EJ(3), de Lima RMS(5), Arcego DM(2), Sassi RB(6), Hall 
GBC(7), Kobor MS(8), Meaney MJ(9), Silveira PP(10).

Author information:
(1)Ludmer Centre for Neuroinformatics and Mental Health, Douglas Mental Health 
University Institute, McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada; Depto Bioquimica 
e PPG CB Bioquimica, Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul, Porto Alegre, 
RS, Brazil; PPG Neurociências, Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul, Porto 
Alegre, RS, Brazil. Electronic address: cdalmaz@ufrgs.br.
(2)Ludmer Centre for Neuroinformatics and Mental Health, Douglas Mental Health 
University Institute, McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada; Department of 
Psychiatry, Faculty of Medicine, McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada.
(3)Ludmer Centre for Neuroinformatics and Mental Health, Douglas Mental Health 
University Institute, McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada.
(4)PPG Neurociências, Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul, Porto Alegre, 
RS, Brazil; Depto Biofisica, Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul, Porto 
Alegre, RS, Brazil.
(5)Ludmer Centre for Neuroinformatics and Mental Health, Douglas Mental Health 
University Institute, McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada; PPG 
Neurociências, Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul, Porto Alegre, RS, 
Brazil.
(6)Mood Disorders Program, Department of Psychiatry & Behavioural Neurosciences, 
McMaster University, Hamilton, ON, Canada.
(7)Department of Psychology, Neuroscience & Behaviour, McMaster University, 
Hamilton, ON, Canada.
(8)Centre for Molecular Medicine and Therapeutics, BC Children's Hospital 
Research Institute, Department of Medical Genetics, The University of British 
Columbia, 938 West 28th Avenue, Vancouver, BC V5Z 4H4, Canada.
(9)Ludmer Centre for Neuroinformatics and Mental Health, Douglas Mental Health 
University Institute, McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada; Department of 
Psychiatry, Faculty of Medicine, McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada; 
Singapore Institute for Clinical Sciences, Agency for Science, Technology and 
Research (A*STAR), Singapore.
(10)Ludmer Centre for Neuroinformatics and Mental Health, Douglas Mental Health 
University Institute, McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada; Department of 
Psychiatry, Faculty of Medicine, McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada; PPG 
Neurociências, Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul, Porto Alegre, RS, 
Brazil.

During development, genetic and environmental factors interact to modify 
specific phenotypes. Both in humans and in animal models, early adversities 
influence cognitive flexibility, an important brain function related to 
behavioral adaptation to variations in the environment. Abnormalities in 
cognitive functions are related to changes in synaptic connectivity in the 
prefrontal cortex (PFC), and altered levels of synaptic proteins. We 
investigated if individual variations in the expression of a network of genes 
co-expressed with the synaptic protein VAMP1 in the prefrontal cortex moderate 
the effect of early environmental quality on the performance of children in 
cognitive flexibility tasks. Genes overexpressed in early childhood and 
co-expressed with the VAMP1 gene in the PFC were selected for study. SNPs from 
these genes (post-clumping) were compiled in an expression-based polygenic score 
(PFC-ePRS-VAMP1). We evaluated cognitive performance of the 4 years-old children 
in two cohorts using similar cognitive flexibility tasks. In the first cohort 
(MAVAN) we utilized two CANTAB tasks: (a) the Intra-/Extra-dimensional Set Shift 
(IED) task, and (b) the Spatial Working Memory (SWM) task. In the second cohort, 
GUSTO, we used the Dimensional Change Card Sort (DCCS) task. The results show 
that in 4 years-old children, the PFC-ePRS-VAMP1 network moderates 
responsiveness to the effects of early adversities on the performance in 
attentional flexibility tests. The same result was observed for a spatial 
working memory task. Compared to attentional flexibility, reversal learning 
showed opposite effects of the environment, as moderated by the ePRS. A parallel 
ICA analysis was performed to identify relationships between whole-brain voxel 
based gray matter density and SNPs that comprise the PFC-ePRS-VAMP1. The early 
environment predicts differences in gray matter content in regions such as 
prefrontal and temporal cortices, significantly associated with a genetic 
component related to Wnt signaling pathways. Our data suggest that a network of 
genes co-expressed with VAMP1 in the PFC moderates the influence of early 
environment on cognitive function in children.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.nlm.2021.107509
PMID: 34454100 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


358. Neuroimage Clin. 2026 Jan 18;49:103953. doi: 10.1016/j.nicl.2026.103953. Online 
ahead of print.

The effect of iron deposition on cognitive fatigue in multiple sclerosis.

Yao B(1), DeLuca J(2), Wylie GR(3).

Author information:
(1)Rocco Ortenzio Neuroimaging Center, Kessler Foundation, West Orange, NJ 
07052, USA; Department of Physical Medicine & Rehabilitation, Rutgers University 
Medical School, Newark, NJ 07103, USA. Electronic address: 
byao@kesslerfoundation.org.
(2)Rocco Ortenzio Neuroimaging Center, Kessler Foundation, West Orange, NJ 
07052, USA; Department of Physical Medicine & Rehabilitation, Rutgers University 
Medical School, Newark, NJ 07103, USA.
(3)Rocco Ortenzio Neuroimaging Center, Kessler Foundation, West Orange, NJ 
07052, USA; Department of Physical Medicine & Rehabilitation, Rutgers University 
Medical School, Newark, NJ 07103, USA; Department of Veterans Affairs, East 
Orange, NJ 07018, USA.

Cognitive fatigue (CF) is a prevalent and disabling symptom in multiple 
sclerosis (MS), but its neural underpinnings remain poorly understood. Emerging 
evidence suggests that iron accumulation in deep gray matter, particularly the 
basal ganglia, may contribute to CF by disrupting neural activity. This study 
examined the relationship between brain iron deposition and CF in individuals 
with MS using functional MRI (fMRI) and quantitative susceptibility mapping 
(QSM). Seventy participants with relapsing-remitting MS (RRMS) and 30 matched 
healthy controls underwent a task-switching paradigm during fMRI, alternating 
between color and speed judgments to induce CF. Iron concentration in the 
caudate, putamen, and globus pallidus was measured using multi-echo gradient 
echo (ME-GRE) sequences. CF was evaluated with a visual analog scale (VAS-F), 
and behavioral performance was assessed by response time and accuracy. MS 
participants showed significantly greater CF over time, with increasing VAS-F 
scores and slower, less accurate responses compared to controls. Higher iron 
levels in the left caudate correlated with steeper CF slopes and reduced 
activation in fatigue-related regions, including the dorsolateral and 
ventromedial prefrontal cortex and anterior cingulate cortex. A significant 
Group × Iron × CF interaction indicated opposite patterns of activation: while 
MS patients showed decreased activation with higher iron, controls exhibited 
increased activation, suggesting a compensatory response. These findings suggest 
that abnormal iron accumulation contributes to CF in MS and may impair 
functional compensation. Iron-sensitive MRI may offer a promising biomarker to 
identify individuals at risk for debilitating fatigue and guide interventions 
targeting iron metabolism.

Copyright © 2026 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.nicl.2026.103953
PMCID: PMC12859211
PMID: 41564669

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare the following financial interests/personal relationships which may be 
considered as potential competing interests: Dr. John DeLuca serves(ed) on an 
advisory board for: Biogen, Novartis, Celgene/BMS, Roche, Janssen, MedRhythms; 
serves(ed) as a consultant for: Celgene/BMS, Sanofi – Genzyme; serves(ed) on a 
speakers bureau for: Biogen, EMD Serono, Sanofi – Genzyme; and has received 
funding from: Biogen, EMD Serono, Roche, BMS, NMSS, CMSC, NIH, MS Society of 
Canada.


359. Hum Brain Mapp. 2009 Dec;30(12):4198-214. doi: 10.1002/hbm.20839.

Preserved executive function in high-performing elderly is driven by large-scale 
recruitment of prefrontal cortical mechanisms.

De Sanctis P(1), Gomez-Ramirez M, Sehatpour P, Wylie GR, Foxe JJ.

Author information:
(1)The Cognitive Neurophysiology Laboratory, Nathan S. Kline Institute for 
Psychiatric Research, Program in Cognitive Neuroscience and Schizophrenia, 
Orangeburg, New York, USA.

High-density electrical mapping of event-related potentials was used to 
investigate the neural processes that permit some elderly subjects to preserve 
high levels of executive functioning. Two possibilities pertain: (1) 
high-performance in elderly subjects is underpinned by similar processing 
mechanisms to those seen in young adults; that is, these individuals display 
minimal functional decay across the lifespan, or (2) preserved function relies 
on successfully recruiting and amplifying control processes to compensate for 
normal sensory-perceptual decline with age. Fifteen young and nineteen elderly 
participants, the latter split into groups of high and low performers, regularly 
alternated between a letter and a number categorization task, switching between 
tasks every third trial (AAA-BBB-AAA...). This allowed for interrogation of 
performance during switch, repeat, and preparatory pre-switch trials. Robust 
effects of age were observed in both frontal and parietal components of the 
task-switching network. Greatest differences originated over prefrontal regions, 
with elderly subjects generating amplified, earlier, and more differentiated 
patterns of activity. This prefrontal amplification was evident only in 
high-performing (HP) elderly, and was strongest on pre-switch trials when 
participants prepared for an upcoming task-switch. Analysis of the early 
transient and late sustained activity using topographic analyses and source 
localization collectively supported a unique and elaborated pattern of activity 
across frontal and parietal scalp in HP-elderly, wholly different to that seen 
in both young and low-performing elderly. On this basis, we propose that 
preserved executive function in HP-elderly is driven by large-scale recruitment 
and enhancement of prefrontal cortical mechanisms.

2009 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/hbm.20839
PMCID: PMC6871224
PMID: 19572310 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


360. Kidney Int. 2010 Oct;78(8):794-802. doi: 10.1038/ki.2010.253. Epub 2010 Jul 28.

Differential activation of memory-relevant brain regions during a dialysis 
cycle.

Lux S(1), Mirzazade S, Kuzmanovic B, Plewan T, Eickhoff SB, Shah NJ, Floege J, 
Fink GR, Eitner F.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Neurosciences and Medicine INM-1, INM-2, INM-3, INM-4, Research 
Centre Jülich, Jülich, Germany. s.lux@fz-juelich.de

Cognitive impairment is a common and largely undiagnosed finding in a 
significant number of dialysis patients. These alterations may result from 
concomitant cerebrovascular disease, hemodynamic instability, the uremic milieu, 
or changes induced by the dialysis process. In order to gain further insight 
into this, we recruited 12 stable chronic hemodialysis patients (without 
clinical neurological disease) and an age- and gender-matched cohort of 12 
control individuals (without renal or neurological problems) in a prospective, 
single-center study. In order to disentangle the influence of dialysis itself on 
memory function, each dialysis patient was tested twice: once immediately before 
dialysis following a long weekend (t1) and again the day after this dialysis 
(t2). The control individuals were tested in the same time frame. 
Neuropsychological testing found that the control individuals performed 
significantly better in verbal learning, motor speed, task switching, verbal 
comprehension, word fluency, spatial visualization, spatial perception, and 
reasoning; all independent of the time point. Functional magnetic resonance 
imaging of the whole brain in seven hemodialysis patients found significantly 
more bilateral activation of the hippocampus during the verbal working memory 
task at t2 relative to t1 compared with their seven matched control 
counterparts. Thus, our study found differential and task-specific activation of 
memory-relevant brain areas during a dialysis cycle.

DOI: 10.1038/ki.2010.253
PMID: 20668428 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


361. Psychopharmacology (Berl). 2013 Jun;227(3):521-31. doi: 
10.1007/s00213-013-3000-5. Epub 2013 Feb 13.

Anatomical connection strength predicts dopaminergic drug effects on 
fronto-striatal function.

van Schouwenburg MR(1), Zwiers MP, van der Schaaf ME, Geurts DE, Schellekens AF, 
Buitelaar JK, Verkes RJ, Cools R.

Author information:
(1)Centre for Cognitive Neuroimaging, Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and 
Behaviour, Radboud University Nijmegen, and Department of Psychiatry, Radboud 
University Nijmegen Medical Centre, 6500 HB Nijmegen, The Netherlands. 
m.vanschouwenburg@donders.ru.nl

RATIONALE: The neurotransmitter dopamine plays a key role in cognitive functions 
that are associated with fronto-striatal circuitry and has been implicated in 
many neuropsychiatric disorders. However, there is a large variability in the 
direction and extent of dopaminergic drug effects across individuals.
OBJECTIVES: We investigated whether individual differences in dopaminergic drug 
effects on human fronto-striatal functioning are associated with individual 
differences in white matter tracts.
METHODS: The effects of the dopamine receptor agonist bromocriptine were 
assessed using functional magnetic resonance imaging in 22 healthy volunteers in 
a placebo-controlled, double-blind, within-subject design. Human 
psychopharmacology and functional neuroimaging were combined with functional 
connectivity analyses and structural connectivity analyses to establish a link 
between dopaminergic drug effects on fronto-striatal function and 
fronto-striatal anatomy.
RESULTS: We demonstrate that bromocriptine alters functional signals associated 
with attention switching in the basal ganglia. Crucially, individual differences 
in the drug's effect on these signals could be predicted from individual 
differences in fronto-striato-thalamic white matter tracts, as indexed by 
diffusion tensor imaging. Anatomical fronto-striatal connectivity also predicted 
drug effects on switch-related functional connectivity between the basal ganglia 
and the prefrontal cortex.
CONCLUSIONS: These data reinforce the link between dopamine, cognition and the 
basal ganglia and have implications for the individual tailoring of dopaminergic 
drug therapy based on anatomical fronto-striatal connection strength.

DOI: 10.1007/s00213-013-3000-5
PMCID: PMC3655213
PMID: 23404064 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


362. Hum Brain Mapp. 2013 May;34(5):999-1012. doi: 10.1002/hbm.21488. Epub 2011 Dec 
8.

The bivalency effect in task switching: event-related potentials.

Grundy JG(1), Benarroch MF, Woodward TS, Metzak PD, Whitman JC, Shedden JM.

Author information:
(1)Psychology, Neuroscience and Behaviour, McMaster University, Ontario, Canada.

During task switching, if we occasionally encounter stimuli that cue more than 
one task (i.e., bivalent stimuli), response slowing is observed on all univalent 
trials within that block, even when no features overlap with the bivalent 
stimuli. This observation is known as the bivalency effect. Previous fMRI work 
(Woodward et al., 2008) clearly suggests a role for the dorsal anterior 
cingulate cortex (dACC) in the bivalency effect, but the time course remains 
uncertain. Here, we present the first high-temporal resolution account for the 
bivalency effect using stimulus-locked event-related potentials. Participants 
alternated among three simple tasks in six experimental blocks, with bivalent 
stimuli appearing occasionally in bivalent blocks (blocks 2, 4, and 6). The 
increased reaction times for univalent stimuli in bivalent blocks demonstrate 
that these stimuli are being processed differently from univalent stimuli in 
purely univalent blocks. Frontal electrode sites captured significant amplitude 
differences associated with the bivalency effect within time windows 100-120 ms, 
375-450 ms, and 500-550 ms, which may reflect additional extraction of visual 
features present in bivalent stimuli (100-120 ms) and suppression of processing 
carried over from irrelevant cues (375-450 ms and 500-550 ms). Our results 
support the fMRI findings and provide additional evidence for involvement of the 
dACC. Furthermore, the bivalency effect dissipated with extended practice both 
behaviorally and electrophysiologically. These findings are discussed in 
relation to the differential processing involved in a controlled response style.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/hbm.21488
PMCID: PMC6869890
PMID: 22162123 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


363. Trends Neurosci. 2019 May;42(5):307-309. doi: 10.1016/j.tins.2019.02.006. Epub 
2019 Mar 11.

Be Prepared: Tune to FM-Theta for Cognitive Control.

Sauseng P(1), Tschentscher N(2), Biel AL(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Ludwig-Maximilians-University Munich, Munich, 
Germany. Electronic address: paul.sauseng@lmu.de.
(2)Department of Psychology, Ludwig-Maximilians-University Munich, Munich, 
Germany.

Comment on
    Neuroimage. 2019 Apr 1;189:130-140. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2019.01.022.

Rhythmical brain activity around 5Hz can be observed in the prefrontal cortex 
under conditions requiring high levels of cognitive control. However, its 
temporal dynamics are still elusive. A recent research paper (Cooper et al. 
Neuroimage 2019;189:130-140) provides evidence that the temporal evolution of 
this frontal-midline theta activity reflects the style of cognitive control 
being implemented.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.tins.2019.02.006
PMID: 30871730 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


364. Hum Brain Mapp. 2012 Mar;33(3):639-51. doi: 10.1002/hbm.21234. Epub 2011 Mar 9.

Challenging a decade of brain research on task switching: brain activation in 
the task-switching paradigm reflects adaptation rather than reconfiguration of 
task sets.

De Baene W(1), Kühn S, Brass M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental Psychology, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium. 
Wouter.DeBaene@ugent.be

In daily life, we permanently need to adapt our behavior to new task situations, 
requiring cognitive control. Such adaptive processes are commonly investigated 
with the task-switching paradigm. Many fMRI studies have interpreted stronger 
activation for switch than repeat trials in fronto-parietal brain areas as 
reflecting an active reconfiguration process in switch trials, tuning the 
cognitive system for proper task execution. From the single cell literature, 
however, one could deduce the alternative interpretation that switch-specific 
activity reflects reduced brain activity in repeat trials due to adaptation. 
These alternative explanations cannot be distinguished by simply comparing brain 
activity in switch and repeat trials. Therefore, we used a parametric approach 
to examine which interpretation is more powerful to account for the data. In all 
areas of the fronto-parietal network, adaptation explained the data better than 
reconfiguration. Therefore, our results call the classical reconfiguration 
interpretation into question and provide first evidence for adaptation of 
abstract task representations.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/hbm.21234
PMCID: PMC6869853
PMID: 21391280 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


365. J Korean Med Sci. 2011 May;26(5):665-74. doi: 10.3346/jkms.2011.26.5.665. Epub 
2011 Apr 21.

Altered brain activation in ventral frontal-striatal regions following a 16-week 
pharmacotherapy in unmedicated obsessive-compulsive disorder.

Han JY(1), Kang DH, Gu BM, Jung WH, Choi JS, Choi CH, Jang JH, Kwon JS.

Author information:
(1)Interdisciplinary Program in Neuroscience, Seoul National University, Seoul, 
Korea.

Recent studies have reported that cognitive inflexibility associated with 
impairments in a frontal-striatal circuit and parietal region is a core 
cognitive deficit of obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD). However, few studies 
have examined progressive changes in these regions following clinical 
improvement in obsessive-compulsive symptoms. To determine if treatment changes 
the aberrant activation pattern associated with task switching in OCD, we 
examined the activation patterns in brain areas after treatment. The study was 
conducted on 10 unmedicated OCD patients and 20 matched controls using 
event-related functional magnetic resonance imaging. Treatment improved the 
clinical symptoms measured by the Yale-Brown Obsessive Compulsive Scale and 
behavioral flexibility indicated by the switching cost. At baseline, OCD showed 
significantly less activation in the dorsal and ventral frontal-striatal circuit 
and parietal regions under the task-switch minus task-repeat condition compared 
with controls. After treatment, the neural responses in the ventral 
frontal-striatal circuit in OCD were partially normalized, whereas the 
activation deficit in dorsal frontoparietal regions that mediate shifting 
attention or behavioral flexibility persisted. It is suggested that altered 
brain activation in ventral frontal-striatal regions in OCD patients is 
associated with their cognitive flexibility and changes in these regions may 
underlie the pathophysiology of OCD.

DOI: 10.3346/jkms.2011.26.5.665
PMCID: PMC3082120
PMID: 21532859 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


366. Brain Res. 2021 Aug 15;1765:147495. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2021.147495. Epub 
2021 Apr 22.

Increased volumes of lobule VI in a valproic acid model of autism are associated 
with worse set-shifting performance in male Long-Evan rats.

Payne M(1), Mali I(1), McKinnell ZE(2), Vangsness L(3), Shrestha TB(4), Bossmann 
SH(1), Plakke B(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, Kansas State University, Manhattan, KS, USA.
(2)Department of Psychological Sciences, Kansas State University, Manhattan, KS, 
USA.
(3)Department of Psychology, Wichita State University, Wichita, KS, USA.
(4)Department of Anatomy & Physiology, Nanotechnology Innovation Center of 
Kansas State-NICKS, KS, USA.
(5)Department of Psychological Sciences, Kansas State University, Manhattan, KS, 
USA. Electronic address: bplakke@ksu.edu.

Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a neurodevelopmental disorder with a skewed 
sex-based diagnostic ratio. While males are at a higher risk for ASD, it is 
critical to understand the neurobiology of the disorder to develop better 
treatments for both males and females. Our prior work has demonstrated that VPA 
(valproic acid) treated offspring had impaired performance on an attentional 
set-shifting task. The current study used MRI and regions of interest analyses 
to measure the volumes of cerebellar subregions in VPA and controls rats that 
had participated in the attentional set-shifting task. VPA males had 
significantly more volume in lobule VI compared to male controls. VPA female 
rats had significantly less volume in lobules I, IV and X compared to female 
controls. In addition, it was revealed that decreases in volume for VPA females 
was associated with worse performance. Males with increases in lobule VI were 
also impaired on the set-shifting task. Similar volumetric differences within 
the cerebellum have been observed in humans with ASD, which suggests that the 
VPA model is capturing some of the same brain changes observed in humans with 
ASD, and that these changes in volume may be impacting cognition.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.brainres.2021.147495
PMCID: PMC8205983
PMID: 33894224 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations of interest: none


367. Neuropsychology. 2008 Jul;22(4):491-507. doi: 10.1037/0894-4105.22.4.491.

Neuroanatomical and cognitive mediators of age-related differences in episodic 
memory.

Head D(1), Rodrigue KM, Kennedy KM, Raz N.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Division of Biology and Biomedical Sciences, 
Washington University in St. Louis, MO 63130, USA. dhead@wustl.edu

Aging is associated with declines in episodic memory. In this study, the authors 
used a path analysis framework to explore the mediating role of differences in 
brain structure, executive functions, and processing speed in age-related 
differences in episodic memory. Measures of regional brain volume (prefrontal 
gray and white matter, caudate, hippocampus, visual cortex), executive functions 
(working memory, inhibitory control, task switching, temporal processing), 
processing speed, and episodic memory were obtained in a sample of young and 
older adults. As expected, age was linked to reduction in regional brain volumes 
and cognitive performance. Moreover, neural and cognitive factors completely 
mediated age differences in episodic memory. Whereas hippocampal shrinkage 
directly affected episodic memory, prefrontal volumetric reductions influenced 
episodic memory via limitations in working memory and inhibitory control. 
Age-related slowing predicted reduced efficiency in temporal processing, working 
memory, and inhibitory control. Lastly, poorer temporal processing directly 
affected episodic memory. No direct effects of age on episodic memory remained 
once these factors were taken into account. These analyses highlight the value 
of a multivariate approach with the understanding of complex relationships in 
cognitive and brain aging.

PsycINFO Database Record (c) 2008 APA, all rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1037/0894-4105.22.4.491
PMCID: PMC2688704
PMID: 18590361 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


368. eNeuro. 2024 Nov 26;11(11):ENEURO.0084-24.2024. doi: 
10.1523/ENEURO.0084-24.2024. Print 2024 Nov.

Fragile Mentalizing: Lack of Behavioral and Neural Markers of Social Cognition 
in an Established Social Perspective Taking Task when Combined with Stress 
Induction.

Cheema S(1)(2), Augustin C(3), Göttlich M(4), Krämer UM(4), Beyer F(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, School of Biological and Behavioural Sciences, 
Queen Mary University of London, London E1 4NS, United Kingdom.
(2)University of Wolverhampton, Wolverhampton WV1 1LY, United Kingdom.
(3)Department of Neurology, University of Lübeck, Lübeck 23562, Germany.
(4)Institute of Medical Psychology, Center of Brain, Behavior and Metabolism, 
University of Lübeck, Lübeck 23562, Germany.
(5)Department of Psychology, School of Biological and Behavioural Sciences, 
Queen Mary University of London, London E1 4NS, United Kingdom 
f.beyer@qmul.ac.uk.

The growing field of social neuroscience is reliant on the development of 
robust, ecologically valid paradigms for simulating social interaction and 
measuring social cognition in highly controlled laboratory settings. Perspective 
taking is a key component of social cognition, and accordingly several paradigms 
aimed at measuring perspective taking exist. A relatively novel paradigm is the 
ball detection task, in which participants and a virtual agent form independent 
beliefs about the presence of a target stimulus behind an occluder. Previous 
studies have shown that incongruent trials (in which the participant's and the 
agent's beliefs differ) affect participant reaction times and elicit increased 
neural activity in the so-called mentalizing network. This paradigm has 
important advantages over previous ones, in that experimental conditions can be 
fully randomized, and ceiling effects are not found even for adult populations. 
Here, we combined this paradigm with a stress induction and a nonstressful 
control task. In an online study, we found no evidence of perspective taking at 
the behavioral level. Combining the task with functional magnetic resonance 
imaging, we found no evidence of perspective taking at the behavioral or neural 
level, even for the control condition. While this paradigm is reliable on its 
own, implementing it in the context of a task-switching paradigm appears to 
reduce participants' focus on task-irrelevant perspective taking elements. Our 
findings highlight the fragility of existing social cognition paradigms and the 
need for reliable, simple, and ecologically valid measures of perspective 
taking.

Copyright © 2024 Cheema et al.

DOI: 10.1523/ENEURO.0084-24.2024
PMCID: PMC11595598
PMID: 39592218 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interests.


369. Neuroreport. 2008 Jul 16;19(11):1127-30. doi: 10.1097/WNR.0b013e3283056521.

Brain activation during fast driving in a driving simulator: the role of the 
lateral prefrontal cortex.

Jäncke L(1), Brunner B, Esslen M.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Psychology, Department of Neuropsychology, University of Zurich, 
Zurich, Switzerland. l.jaencke@psychologie.uzh.ch

Little is currently known about the neural underpinnings of the cognitive 
control of driving behavior in realistic situations and of the driver's speeding 
behavior in particular. In this study, participants drove in realistic scenarios 
presented in a high-end driving simulator. Scalp-recorded EEG oscillations in 
the alpha-band (8-13 Hz) with a 30-electrode montage were recorded while the 
participants drove under different conditions: (i) excessively fast (Fast), (ii) 
in a controlled manner at a safe speed (Correct), and (iii) impatiently in the 
context of testing traffic conditions (Impatient). Intracerebral sources of 
alpha-band activation were estimated using low resolution electrical tomography. 
Given that previous studies have shown a strong negative correlation between the 
Bold response in the frontal cortex and the alpha-band power, we used 
alpha-band-related activity as an estimation of frontal activation. Statistical 
analysis revealed more alpha-band-related activity (i.e. less neuronal 
activation) in the right lateral prefrontal cortex, including the dorsolateral 
prefrontal cortex, during fast driving. Those participants who speeded most and 
exhibited greater risk-taking behavior demonstrated stronger alpha-related 
activity (i.e. less neuronal activation) in the left anterior lateral prefrontal 
cortex. These findings are discussed in the context of current theories about 
the role of the lateral prefrontal cortex in controlling risk-taking behavior, 
task switching, and multitasking.

DOI: 10.1097/WNR.0b013e3283056521
PMID: 18596613 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


370. Brain Res Cogn Brain Res. 2005 Jun;24(1):133-54. doi: 
10.1016/j.cogbrainres.2005.01.008. Epub 2005 Feb 25.

Dynamics of task sets: evidence from dense-array event-related potentials.

Poulsen C(1), Luu P, Davey C, Tucker DM.

Author information:
(1)University of Oregon, Eugene, OR 97403, USA. cpoulsen@bic.mni.mcgill.ca

Prior research suggests that task sets facilitate coherent, goal-directed 
behavior by providing an internal, contextual frame that biases selection toward 
context-relevant stimulus attributes and responses. Questions about how task 
sets are engaged, maintained, and shifted have recently become a major focus of 
research on executive control processes. We employed dense-array (128-channel) 
event-related potential (ERP) methodology to examine the dynamics of brain 
systems engaged during the preparation and implementation of task switching. The 
EEG was recorded while participants performed letter and digit judgments to 
pseudorandomly-ordered, univalent (#3, A%) and bivalent (G5) stimulus trials, 
with the appropriate task cued by a colored rectangle presented 450 ms before 
target onset. Results revealed spatial and temporal variations in brain activity 
that could be related to preparatory processes common to both switch and repeat 
trials, switch-specific control processes engaged to reconfigure and maintain 
task set under conflict, and visual priming benefits of task repetition. Despite 
extensive practice and improvement, both behavioral and ERP results indicated 
that subjects maintained high levels of executive control processing with 
extended task engagement. The patterns of ERP activity obtained in the present 
study fit well with functional neuroanatomical models of self-regulation of 
action. The frontopolar and right-lateralized frontal switch effects obtained in 
the present study are consistent with the role of these regions in adapting to 
changing contextual contingencies. In contrast, the centroparietal P3b and N384 
effects related to the contextual ambiguity of bivalent trials are consistent 
with the context monitoring and updating functions associated with the posterior 
cingulate learning circuit.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cogbrainres.2005.01.008
PMID: 15922166 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


371. Elife. 2015 Apr 13;4:e06481. doi: 10.7554/eLife.06481.

Recruitment of the default mode network during a demanding act of executive 
control.

Crittenden BM(1)(2)(3), Mitchell DJ(1), Duncan J(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Medical Research Council Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit, Cambridge, United 
Kingdom.
(2)University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom.
(3)Oxford Centre for Human Brain Activity, University of Oxford, Oxford, United 
Kingdom.

Erratum in
    Elife. 2017 Jun 05;6:e29017. doi: 10.7554/eLife.29017.

In the human brain, a default mode or task-negative network shows reduced 
activity during many cognitive tasks and is often associated with 
internally-directed processes, such as mind wandering and thoughts about the 
self. In contrast to this task-negative pattern, we show increased activity 
during a large and demanding switch in task set. Furthermore, we employ 
multivoxel pattern analysis and find that regions of interest within default 
mode network are encoding task-relevant information during task performance. 
Activity in this network may be driven by major revisions of cognitive context, 
whether internally or externally focused.

DOI: 10.7554/eLife.06481
PMCID: PMC4427863
PMID: 25866927 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that no competing interests 
exist.


372. Neuroimage. 2004 Jan;21(1):181-91. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2003.08.043.

Behavioral and functional MRI study of attention shift in human verbal working 
memory.

Li ZH(1), Sun XW, Wang ZX, Zhang XC, Zhang DR, He S, Hu XP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurobiology and Biophysics, University of Science and 
Technology of China, Anhui 230027, Hefei, PR China.

The tripartite model of memory proposed the requirement of attentional switching 
when accessing different items in working memory [J. Exp. Psychol. Learn. Mem. 
Cogn. 27 (2001) 817]. This internal focus of attention is limited to just one 
item and the switching process is time-consuming [Mem. Cogn. 26 (1998) 263]. In 
the current study, given a three-digit list stored in working memory, we found 
that it took longer to shift attention in the direction of "Upstream" than 
"Downstream", and that each shift was a "single step" process. To investigate 
the neural basis of this type of attention switching, we performed a functional 
MRI study. The results revealed that at least three important brain areas are 
involved, including the left dorsal lateral prefrontal cortex, the cingulate 
gyrus, and the medial occipital cortex. These areas all showed greater 
activation in the attention shift condition compared to control conditions of no 
(or decreased) attention shift requirements. In addition, the hemodynamic 
activities in these areas are highly correlated, suggesting a strong functional 
connectivity between them. Taken together with evidence from several recent 
investigations, our results suggest that these areas each play an important and 
specific role in collaboratively supporting the function of attention shift in 
working memory.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2003.08.043
PMID: 14741655 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


373. Neuropsychologia. 2018 Sep;118(Pt A):20-28. doi: 
10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2018.02.014. Epub 2018 Feb 13.

Creativity and cognitive control: Behavioral and ERP evidence that divergent 
thinking, but not real-life creative achievement, relates to better cognitive 
control.

Zabelina DL(1), Ganis G(2).

Author information:
(1)University of Arkansas Department of Psychological Science, 816 Memorial 
Hall, Fayetteville, AR 72701, USA. Electronic address: dlzabeli@uark.edu.
(2)Plymouth University, School of Psychology and Cognition Institute, Portland 
Square, Drake Circus, Plymouth, Devon PL4 8AA, United Kingdom. Electronic 
address: giorgio.ganis@plymouth.ac.uk.

Two studies used event-related potentials (ERPs) to examine whether and how 
divergent thinking and creative achievement are linked to attentional 
flexibility and cognitive control as indexed by response times and by the 
amplitude of the anterior N2 ERP component. Both experiments used an oddball 
paradigm in which participants viewed hierarchical letter stimuli and identified 
target letters in frequent and rare target trials. The successful identification 
of targets required attentional flexibility when switching levels of attention 
(from the frequent global to the rare local attentional level, or vice-versa). 
Divergent thinkers showed smaller switching times on rare target trials, 
indicating higher levels of attentional flexibility. Furthermore, divergent 
thinkers engaged cognitive control processes more strongly at the moment of the 
attentional switch (and before the response), as indicated by a larger N2 
difference between frequent and rare targets. In contrast, creative achievement 
was associated neither with the switching times on rare target trials, nor with 
a larger N2 difference between frequent and rare targets. All results held when 
controlling for general intelligence. Results from these studies provide 
evidence that divergent thinking is associated with higher attentional 
flexibility and that such attentional flexibility relies on cognitive control 
processes required when disengaging from one level of attention (e.g., global), 
and shifting to the other level of attention (e.g., local).

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2018.02.014
PMID: 29447843 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


374. Cortex. 2013 Jul-Aug;49(7):1790-800. doi: 10.1016/j.cortex.2012.10.014. Epub 
2012 Nov 6.

Are core component processes of executive function dissociable within the 
frontal lobes? Evidence from humans with focal prefrontal damage.

Tsuchida A(1), Fellows LK.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology & Neurosurgery, Montreal Neurological Institute, 
McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada. ami.tsuchida@mail.mcgill.ca

Executive function encompasses a range of control processes supporting flexible, 
goal-directed behaviour. Attentional set-shifting, updating of information in 
working memory, and inhibitory control have been proposed as key components of 
executive function, but debate continues as to the validity of this conceptual 
framework, and the neural substrates of these putative components. Here we 
examined prefrontal structure-function relationships for each of these component 
processes in a large cohort of patients with focal prefrontal damage. Forty-five 
patients with focal damage to various sectors of prefrontal cortex (PFC), and 50 
demographically matched healthy control subjects performed an attention shifting 
task, the Stroop colour naming task, and a spatial search task. Voxel-based 
lesion-symptom mapping revealed that damage to left ventrolateral PFC led to 
impaired performance on both the Stroop and attention shifting tasks. In 
contrast, performance of the spatial search task depended on several regions 
within PFC, but notably not left ventrolateral PFC. These observations were 
confirmed with direct comparison of performance between patients grouped 
according to lesion location. This dissociation partly supports the component 
process view of executive function, distinguishing the goal-directed regulation 
of attention (perhaps specifically in the verbal domain) from the requirements 
of the spatial search task, including the updating of information in spatial 
working memory. These findings are easier to reconcile with modular, 
material-specific accounts than with more unitary models of executive function.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cortex.2012.10.014
PMID: 23206529 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


375. Neurobiol Aging. 2016 Jan;37:117-126. doi: 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2015.09.019. 
Epub 2015 Oct 29.

Neuromelanin marks the spot: identifying a locus coeruleus biomarker of 
cognitive reserve in healthy aging.

Clewett DV(1), Lee TH(2), Greening S(3), Ponzio A(4), Margalit E(5), Mather 
M(6).

Author information:
(1)Neuroscience Graduate Program, University of Southern California, Los 
Angeles, CA, USA. Electronic address: clewett@usc.edu.
(2)Department of Psychology, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, 
USA.
(3)Department of Psychology, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, 
USA; Davis School of Gerontology, University of Southern California, Los 
Angeles, CA, USA; Department of Psychology, Louisiana State University, Baton 
Rouge, LA, USA.
(4)Davis School of Gerontology, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, 
CA, USA.
(5)Dornsife College of Letters and Sciences, University of Southern California, 
Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(6)Neuroscience Graduate Program, University of Southern California, Los 
Angeles, CA, USA; Department of Psychology, University of Southern California, 
Los Angeles, CA, USA; Davis School of Gerontology, University of Southern 
California, Los Angeles, CA, USA.

Leading a mentally stimulating life may build up a reserve of neural and mental 
resources that preserve cognitive abilities in late life. Recent autopsy 
evidence links neuronal density in the locus coeruleus (LC), the brain's main 
source of norepinephrine, to slower cognitive decline before death, inspiring 
the idea that the noradrenergic system is a key component of reserve (Robertson, 
I. H. 2013. A noradrenergic theory of cognitive reserve: implications for 
Alzheimer's disease. Neurobiol. Aging. 34, 298-308). Here, we tested this 
hypothesis using neuromelanin-sensitive magnetic resonance imaging to visualize 
and measure LC signal intensity in healthy younger and older adults. Established 
proxies of reserve, including education, occupational attainment, and verbal 
intelligence, were linearly correlated with LC signal intensity in both age 
groups. Results indicated that LC signal intensity was significantly higher in 
older than younger adults and significantly lower in women than in men. 
Consistent with the LC-reserve hypothesis, both verbal intelligence and a 
composite reserve score were positively associated with LC signal intensity in 
older adults. LC signal intensity was also more strongly associated with 
attentional shifting ability in older adults with lower cognitive reserve. 
Together these findings link in vivo estimates of LC neuromelanin signal 
intensity to cognitive reserve in normal aging.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2015.09.019
PMCID: PMC5134892
PMID: 26521135 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


376. Neuropsychologia. 2017 Nov;106:100-111. doi: 
10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2017.09.018. Epub 2017 Sep 20.

Neural correlates of reconfiguration failure reveal the time course of task-set 
reconfiguration.

Steinhauser M(1), Maier ME(2), Ernst B(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Catholic University of Eichstätt-Ingolstadt, 
Germany. Electronic address: Marco.Steinhauser@ku.de.
(2)Department of Psychology, Catholic University of Eichstätt-Ingolstadt, 
Germany.

The ability to actively prepare for new tasks is crucial for achieving 
goal-directed behavior. The task-switching paradigm is frequently used to 
investigate this task-set reconfiguration. In the present study, we adopted a 
novel approach to identify a neural signature of reconfiguration in 
event-related potentials. Our method was to isolate neural correlates of 
reconfiguration failure and to use these correlates to reveal the time course of 
reconfiguration in task switches and task repetitions. We employed a 
task-switching paradigm in which two types of errors could be distinguished: 
task errors (the incorrect task was applied) and response errors (an incorrect 
response for the correct task was provided). Because differential activity 
between both error types distinguishes successful and failed reconfiguration, 
this activity could be used as a neural signature of the reconfiguration 
process. We found that, whereas reconfiguration takes place on task repetitions 
and task switches, it occurred earlier in the former than in the latter. 
Single-trial analysis revealed that the same activity predicted the amplitude of 
error-related brain activity, providing further support that this preparatory 
activity reflects reconfiguration. Our results implicate that reconfiguration is 
not switch-specific but that task switches and task repetitions differ with 
respect to the time course of reconfiguration. Furthermore, this study 
demonstrates that considering neural correlates of failure is a promising 
approach to link cognitive mechanisms to specific neural processes.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2017.09.018
PMID: 28939202 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


377. Phys Biol. 2015 Jan 26;12(1):016009. doi: 10.1088/1478-3975/12/1/016009.

Development of modularity in the neural activity of children's brains.

Chen M(1), Deem MW.

Author information:
(1)Department of Physics & Astronomy, Rice University, Houston, TX 77005, USA.

We study how modularity of the human brain changes as children develop into 
adults. Theory suggests that modularity can enhance the response function of a 
networked system subject to changing external stimuli. Thus, greater cognitive 
performance might be achieved for more modular neural activity, and modularity 
might likely increase as children develop. The value of modularity calculated 
from functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) data is observed to increase 
during childhood development and peak in young adulthood. Head motion is 
deconvolved from the fMRI data, and it is shown that the dependence of 
modularity on age is independent of the magnitude of head motion. A model is 
presented to illustrate how modularity can provide greater cognitive performance 
at short times, i.e. task switching. A fitness function is extracted from the 
model. Quasispecies theory is used to predict how the average modularity evolves 
with age, illustrating the increase of modularity during development from 
children to adults that arises from selection for rapid cognitive function in 
young adults. Experiments exploring the effect of modularity on cognitive 
performance are suggested. Modularity may be a potential biomarker for injury, 
rehabilitation, or disease.

DOI: 10.1088/1478-3975/12/1/016009
PMCID: PMC4489707
PMID: 25619207 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


378. Cogn Affect Behav Neurosci. 2026 Feb;26(1):104-119. doi: 
10.3758/s13415-025-01349-2. Epub 2025 Dec 5.

Anxiety facilitates disengagement when switching from negative-valenced stimuli: 
Mediating role of attentional control.

Wong YS(1), Yu J(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Mathematical Sciences, School of Physical and Mathematical 
Sciences, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore, Singapore. 
yishengwong.ysw@gmail.com.
(2)Psychology, School of Social Sciences, Nanyang Technological University, 
Singapore, Singapore.

The Attentional Control Theory postulates that anxiety impairs processing 
efficiency (and often performance effectiveness) on tasks involving the shifting 
function due to deficient recruitment of attentional control resources. 
Furthermore, recent studies have suggested that the association between 
self-reported attentional control (as measured by the Attentional Control Scale; 
ACS) and anxiety may be driven by biased self-perceptions of one's attentional 
control ability. The present study investigated the relationships among anxiety 
(measured via the Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale-Anxiety subscale), 
subjective attentional control (measured via the ACS), and affective 
task-switching performance (measured via a word-based paradigm) in 181 adults 
from the Max Planck Institute-Leipzig Mind-Brain-Body dataset. At the behavioral 
level, we found no statistically significant association between anxiety and 
switch-cost measures after correction for multiple comparisons. However, a 
pattern emerged suggesting that higher anxiety was linked to faster 
disengagement from negative-valenced stimuli. This pattern was partially 
mediated by subjective attentional control. The whole-brain vertex-wise analysis 
revealed a negative association between ACS scores and cortical thickness in the 
right rostral anterior cingulate cortex (rACC)-a region typically associated 
with emotional regulation. However, no significant associations were found 
between ACS scores and resting-state functional connectivity, and no significant 
mediating effect was identified for the right rACC thickness on the link between 
anxiety and affective task-switching performance. Overall, these findings 
suggest that anxiety may facilitate strategic avoidance of aversive information 
under certain conditions, and that ACS scores may primarily reflect biased 
beliefs about attentional control abilities rather than objective cognitive 
control abilities.

© 2025. The Psychonomic Society, Inc.

DOI: 10.3758/s13415-025-01349-2
PMID: 41350506 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Conflict of interest: The authors 
declare that they have no conflict of interest. Ethics approval: All procedures 
performed were in accordance with the ethical standards of the institutional 
and/or national research committee and with the 1964 Helsinki Declaration and 
its later amendments or comparable ethical standards. The study was approved by 
the University of Leipzig Human Ethics Committee (097/15-ff). Consent to 
participate: All participants provided written informed consent, including 
consent to share de-identified data. Consent for publication: The authors affirm 
that human research participants provided informed consent for publication.


379. Neuropsychologia. 2007 May 15;45(9):2038-50. doi: 
10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2007.02.013. Epub 2007 Feb 23.

Cueing effects on semantic and perceptual categorization: ERPs reveal 
differential effects of validity as a function of processing stage.

Lai G(1), Mangels JA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurobiology & Behavior, Columbia University, New York, NY, 
USA. gyl2101@columbia.edu

Valid cueing has been shown to accelerate target identification and improve 
decision accuracy. However, the precise nature and extent to which biasing 
influences the successive stages of target processing remain unclear. The 
present event-related potential (ERP) study used a "hybrid" task that combined 
features of standard cued-attention and task-switching paradigms in order to 
explore the effects of expectation on both identification and categorization of 
centrally presented stimuli. Subjects made semantic judgments (living/nonliving) 
on word targets ("bunny"), and perceptual judgments (right/left) on arrow 
targets ("<<<<<"). Target expectancy was manipulated using cues that were valid 
(60 percent of trials), invalid (10 percent), or neutral (30 percent). Invalidly 
cued targets required task-set switching before categorization could commence, 
and resulted in RT costs relative to validly or neutrally cued targets. 
Additional benefits from valid-cueing were only observed for word targets. 
Invalid cueing of both arrow and word targets modulated early posterior visual 
potentials (P1/N1) and elicited a subsequent anterior P3a (270 ms). The temporal 
relationship of these effects suggests that the P3a indexed domain-general 
task-set switching processes recruited in response to the detection of 
unexpected perceptual information. Subsequent to the P3a and immediately 
preceding the behavioral response, validly cued targets elicited enhanced 
stimulus-specific waveforms (arrows: parietal positivity [P290], words: inferior 
temporal negativity [late ITN: 400-600 ms]). The degree of neural enhancement 
relative to the invalid and neutral conditions mirrored the magnitude of 
corresponding RT benefits, suggesting that these waveforms indexed 
categorization, decision processes or both. Together, these results suggest that 
valid cueing increases the neural efficiency of initial stimulus identification, 
facilitating transmission of information to subsequent categorization stages, 
where increased neural activity leads to behavioral benefits.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2007.02.013
PMCID: PMC2099310
PMID: 17382975 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


380. J Cogn Neurosci. 2009 Feb;21(2):289-302. doi: 10.1162/jocn.2009.21047.

Cerebral white matter integrity mediates adult age differences in cognitive 
performance.

Madden DJ(1), Spaniol J, Costello MC, Bucur B, White LE, Cabeza R, Davis SW, 
Dennis NA, Provenzale JM, Huettel SA.

Author information:
(1)Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC 27710, USA. david.madden@duke.edu

Previous research has established that age-related decline occurs in measures of 
cerebral white matter integrity, but the role of this decline in age-related 
cognitive changes is not clear. To conclude that white matter integrity has a 
mediating (causal) contribution, it is necessary to demonstrate that statistical 
control of the white matter-cognition relation reduces the magnitude of 
age-cognition relation. In this research, we tested the mediating role of white 
matter integrity, in the context of a task-switching paradigm involving word 
categorization. Participants were 20 healthy, community-dwelling older adults 
(60-85 years), and 20 younger adults (18-27 years). From diffusion tensor 
imaging tractography, we obtained fractional anisotropy (FA) as an index of 
white matter integrity in the genu and splenium of the corpus callosum and the 
superior longitudinal fasciculus (SLF). Mean FA values exhibited age-related 
decline consistent with a decrease in white matter integrity. From a model of 
reaction time distributions, we obtained independent estimates of the decisional 
and nondecisional (perceptual-motor) components of task performance. Age-related 
decline was evident in both components. Critically, age differences in task 
performance were mediated by FA in two regions: the central portion of the genu, 
and splenium-parietal fibers in the right hemisphere. This relation held only 
for the decisional component and was not evident in the nondecisional component. 
This result is the first demonstration that the integrity of specific white 
matter tracts is a mediator of age-related changes in cognitive performance.

DOI: 10.1162/jocn.2009.21047
PMCID: PMC2676336
PMID: 18564054 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


381. Neuroimage. 2016 Aug 15;137:116-123. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2016.05.010. Epub 
2016 May 3.

Reward-associated features capture attention in the absence of awareness: 
Evidence from object-substitution masking.

Harris JA(1), Donohue SE(2), Schoenfeld MA(2), Hopf JM(2), Heinze HJ(2), 
Woldorff MG(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Otto-von-Guericke University Magdeburg, Magdeburg, 
Germany; Leibniz Institute for Neurobiology, Magdeburg, Germany. Electronic 
address: joseph.allen.harris@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Neurology, Otto-von-Guericke University Magdeburg, Magdeburg, 
Germany; Leibniz Institute for Neurobiology, Magdeburg, Germany.
(3)Department of Neurology, Otto-von-Guericke University Magdeburg, Magdeburg, 
Germany; Leibniz Institute for Neurobiology, Magdeburg, Germany; Center for 
Cognitive Neuroscience, Duke University, Durham, NC, USA; Department of 
Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Duke University, Durham, NC, USA; Department 
of Psychology and Neuroscience, Duke University, Durham, NC, USA.

Reward-associated visual features have been shown to capture visual attention, 
evidenced in faster and more accurate behavioral performance, as well as in 
neural responses reflecting lateralized shifts of visual attention to those 
features. Specifically, the contralateral N2pc event-related-potential (ERP) 
component that reflects attentional shifting exhibits increased amplitude in 
response to task-relevant targets containing a reward-associated feature. In the 
present study, we examined the automaticity of such reward-association effects 
using object-substitution masking (OSM) in conjunction with MEG measures of 
visual attentional shifts. In OSM, a visual-search array is presented, with the 
target item to be detected indicated by a surrounding mask (here, four 
surrounding squares). Delaying the offset of the target-surrounding four-dot 
mask relative to the offset of the rest of the target/distracter array disrupts 
the viewer's awareness of the target (masked condition), whereas simultaneous 
offsets do not (unmasked condition). Here we manipulated whether the color of 
the OSM target was or was not of a previously reward-associated color. By 
tracking reward-associated enhancements of behavior and the N2pc in response to 
masked targets containing a previously rewarded or unrewarded feature, the 
automaticity of attentional capture by reward could be probed. We found an 
enhanced N2pc response to targets containing a previously reward-associated 
color feature. Moreover, this enhancement of the N2pc by reward did not differ 
between masking conditions, nor did it differ as a function of the apparent 
visibility of the target within the masked condition. Overall, these results 
underscore the automaticity of attentional capture by reward-associated 
features, and demonstrate the ability of feature-based reward associations to 
shape attentional capture and allocation outside of perceptual awareness.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2016.05.010
PMID: 27153978 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


382. Science. 2000 Jun 9;288(5472):1835-8. doi: 10.1126/science.288.5472.1835.

Dissociating the role of the dorsolateral prefrontal and anterior cingulate 
cortex in cognitive control.

MacDonald AW 3rd(1), Cohen JD, Stenger VA, Carter CS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15260, 
USA.

Theories of the regulation of cognition suggest a system with two necessary 
components: one to implement control and another to monitor performance and 
signal when adjustments in control are needed. Event-related functional magnetic 
resonance imaging and a task-switching version of the Stroop task were used to 
examine whether these components of cognitive control have distinct neural bases 
in the human brain. A double dissociation was found. During task preparation, 
the left dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (Brodmann's area 9) was more active for 
color naming than for word reading, consistent with a role in the implementation 
of control. In contrast, the anterior cingulate cortex (Brodmann's areas 24 and 
32) was more active when responding to incongruent stimuli, consistent with a 
role in performance monitoring.

DOI: 10.1126/science.288.5472.1835
PMID: 10846167 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


383. Neuropsychology. 2016 Nov;30(8):988-997. doi: 10.1037/neu0000294. Epub 2016 May 
12.

Effects of bilingualism on vocabulary, executive functions, age of dementia 
onset, and regional brain structure.

Gasquoine PG(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychological Science, University of Texas Rio Grande Valley.

OBJECTIVE: To review the current literature on the effects of bilingualism on 
vocabulary, executive functions, age of dementia onset, and regional brain 
structure.
METHOD: PubMed and PsycINFO databases were searched (from January 1999 to 
present) for relevant original research and review articles on bilingualism (but 
not multilingualism) paired with each target neuropsychological variable 
published in English. A qualitative review of these articles was conducted.
RESULTS: It has long been known that mean scores of bilinguals fall below those 
of monolinguals on vocabulary and other language, but not visual-perceptual, 
format cognitive tests. Contemporary studies that have reported higher mean 
scores for bilinguals than monolinguals on executive function task-switching or 
inhibition tasks have not always been replicated, leading to concerns of 
publication bias, statistical flaws, and failures to match groups on potentially 
confounding variables. Studies suggesting the onset of Alzheimer's disease 
occurred about 4 years later for bilinguals versus monolinguals have not been 
confirmed in longitudinal, cohort, community-based, incidence studies that have 
used neuropsychological testing and diagnostic criteria to establish an age of 
dementia diagnosis. Neuroimaging studies of regional gray and white matter 
volume in bilinguals versus monolinguals show inconsistencies in terms of both 
the regions of difference and the nature of the difference.
CONCLUSIONS: Resolving inconsistencies in the behavioral data is necessary 
before searching in the brain for neuroanatomical correlation. Comparisons of 
balanced versus language-dominant groups within the same ethnoculture combined 
with objective measurement of bilingualism could better match groups on 
potentially confounding variables. (PsycINFO Database Record

(c) 2016 APA, all rights reserved).

DOI: 10.1037/neu0000294
PMID: 27175942 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


384. PLoS One. 2013 Nov 5;8(11):e79272. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0079272. 
eCollection 2013.

Relating inter-individual differences in verbal creative thinking to cerebral 
structures: an optimal voxel-based morphometry study.

Zhu F(1), Zhang Q, Qiu J.

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Cognition and Personality (SWU), Ministry of Education, 
Chongqing, China ; School of Psychology, Southwest University, Chongqing, China.

Creativity can be defined the capacity of an individual to produce something 
original and useful. An important measurable component of creativity is 
divergent thinking. Despite existing studies on creativity-related cerebral 
structural basis, no study has used a large sample to investigate the 
relationship between individual verbal creativity and regional gray matter 
volumes (GMVs) and white matter volumes (WMVs). In the present work, optimal 
voxel-based morphometry (VBM) was employed to identify the structure that 
correlates verbal creativity (measured by the verbal form of Torrance Tests of 
Creative Thinking) across the brain in young healthy subjects. Verbal creativity 
was found to be significantly positively correlated with regional GMV in the 
left inferior frontal gyrus (IFG), which is believed to be responsible for 
language production and comprehension, new semantic representation, and memory 
retrieval, and in the right IFG, which may involve inhibitory control and 
attention switching. A relationship between verbal creativity and regional WMV 
in the left and right IFG was also observed. Overall, a highly verbal creative 
individual with superior verbal skills may demonstrate a greater computational 
efficiency in the brain areas involved in high-level cognitive processes 
including language production, semantic representation and cognitive control.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0079272
PMCID: PMC3818430
PMID: 24223921 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.


385. J Cogn Neurosci. 2004 May;16(4):609-20. doi: 10.1162/089892904323057335.

Decomposing components of task preparation with functional magnetic resonance 
imaging.

Brass M(1), von Cramon DY.

Author information:
(1)Max Planck Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience, Leipzig, Germany. 
brass@cns.mpg.de

It is widely acknowledged that the prefrontal cortex plays a major role in 
cognitive control processes. One important experimental paradigm for 
investigating such higher order cognitive control is the task-switching 
paradigm. This paradigm investigates the ability to switch flexibly between 
different task situations. In this context, it has been found that participants 
are able to anticipatorily prepare an upcoming task. This ability has been 
assumed to reflect endogenous cognitive control. However, it is difficult to 
isolate task preparation process from task execution using functional magnetic 
resonance imaging (fMRI). In the present study, we introduce a new experimental 
manipulation to investigate task preparation with fMRI. By manipulating the 
number of times a task was prepared, we could demonstrate that the left inferior 
frontal junction (IFJ) area (near the junction of inferior frontal sulcus and 
inferior precentral sulcus), the right inferior frontal gyrus, and the right 
intraparietal sulcus are involved in task preparation. By manipulating the 
cue-task mapping, we could further show that this activation is not related to 
cue encoding but to the updating of the relevant task representation. Based on 
these and previous results, we assume that the IFJ area constitutes a 
functionally separable division of the lateral prefrontal cortex. Finally, our 
data suggest that task preparation does not differ for switch and repetition 
trials in paradigms with a high proportion of switch trials, casting doubt on 
the assumption that an independent task set reconfiguration process takes place 
in the preparation interval.

DOI: 10.1162/089892904323057335
PMID: 15165351 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


386. Brain Lang. 2019 Oct;197:104665. doi: 10.1016/j.bandl.2019.104665. Epub 2019 Aug 
27.

Effects of bilingual language experience on basal ganglia computations: A 
dynamic causal modeling test of the conditional routing model.

Yamasaki BL(1), Stocco A(2), Liu AS(3), Prat CS(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Box 351525, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 
98195, USA; Institute for Learning and Brain Sciences, Box 357988, University of 
Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, USA; Department of Psychology and Human 
Development, 230 Appleton Place, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN 37203, 
USA. Electronic address: brianna.l.yamasaki@vanderbilt.edu.
(2)Department of Psychology, Box 351525, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 
98195, USA; Institute for Learning and Brain Sciences, Box 357988, University of 
Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, USA.
(3)Institute for Learning and Brain Sciences, Box 357988, University of 
Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, USA.

Bilingual language control is characterized by the ability to select from 
amongst competing representations based on the current language in use. 
According to the Conditional Routing Model (CRM), this feat is underpinned by 
basal-ganglia signal-routing mechanisms, and may have implications for cognitive 
flexibility. The current experiment used dynamic causal modeling of fMRI data to 
compare network-level brain functioning in monolinguals and bilinguals during a 
task that required productive (semantic decision) and receptive (language) 
switches. Consistent with the CRM, results showed that: (1) both switch types 
drove activation in the basal ganglia, (2) bilinguals and monolinguals differed 
in the strength of influence of dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC) on basal 
ganglia, and (3) differences in bilingual language experience were marginally 
related to the strength of influence of the switching drives onto basal ganglia. 
Additionally, a task-by-group interaction was found, suggesting that when 
bilinguals engaged in language-switching, their task-switching costs were 
reduced.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bandl.2019.104665
PMID: 31470347 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


387. Neuroimage. 2013 Dec;83:870-9. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2013.07.037. Epub 2013 
Jul 19.

The functional role of the frontal cortex in pre-attentive auditory change 
detection.

Tse CY(1), Rinne T, Ng KK, Penney TB.

Author information:
(1)Temasek Laboratories, National University of Singapore, Singapore.

Accounts of the functional role of the frontal cortex in pre-attentive auditory 
change detection include attention switching, response inhibition, contrast 
enhancement, and activation of a predictive model. These accounts assume 
different sequential activation patterns between the temporal and frontal 
cortices: Change detection in the auditory areas of the superior temporal cortex 
(STC) followed by inferior frontal cortex (IFC) activation for attention 
switching and response inhibition; STC preceded by IFC activation for contrast 
enhancement; and an IFC-STC-IFC activation sequence for the predictive model. We 
used the event-related optical signal (EROS), which provides a temporal 
resolution of milliseconds and a spatial resolution of 5 to 10mm, combined with 
lagged correlation path modeling to examine the response of the right frontal 
and temporal cortices to auditory duration deviants of varying magnitude. 
Event-related potentials (ERPs) were also recorded, as was the slow optical 
(hemodynamic) brain response. The data analyses revealed temporal-frontal, 
frontal-temporal-frontal, and temporal-frontal activation patterns when the 
deviants represented relatively large, medium, and small changes from the 
standard stimulus, respectively. These results indicate that the degree of 
deviance modulates spatio-temporal dynamics within the STC-IFC auditory change 
detection network.

© 2013.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2013.07.037
PMID: 23871868 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


388. Cogn Affect Behav Neurosci. 2011 Dec;11(4):600-7. doi: 
10.3758/s13415-011-0055-9.

Cue-switch effects do not rely on the same neural systems as task-switch 
effects.

De Baene W(1), Brass M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental Psychology, Ghent University, Henri Dunantlaan 2, 
Ghent 9000, Belgium. Wouter.DeBaene@ugent.be

The cued task-switching paradigm is often used to study cognitive control. In 
this paradigm, people are generally slower and make more errors when switching 
tasks as compared with repeating the same task. When two cues are mapped to each 
task, these switch costs could result from a mixture of cue-switch effects 
(which are thought to reflect cue encoding) and task-switch effects (which are 
thought to reflect task set preparation). In the behavioral literature, there 
has been a lively debate on the degree to which cue-switch effects and 
task-switch effects indeed reflect different phenomena. In the present study, we 
used fMRI to examine whether and to what extent the neural network underlying 
task-switch effects is also involved in cue-switch effects. We found task-switch 
but no cue-switch effects in the frequently observed preparation-related 
activation in fronto-parietal areas. These results suggest that the 
fronto-parietal areas displaying preparatory activity in task-switching 
paradigms are engaged in task preparation but not in cue encoding and that task 
preparation and cue encoding rely on completely different processes.

DOI: 10.3758/s13415-011-0055-9
PMID: 21874602 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


389. Cortex. 2026 Mar;196:90-100. doi: 10.1016/j.cortex.2026.01.002. Epub 2026 Jan 
14.

Global functional connectivity of cognitive control networks predicts 
task-switching performance in older adults.

Madero B(1), Sodoma M(2), Oehler C(2), Magnotta VA(3), Long JD(4), Hazeltine 
E(2), Voss MW(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, University of Iowa, Iowa 
City, IA, 52242, USA. Electronic address: bryan-madero@uiowa.edu.
(2)Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, University of Iowa, Iowa 
City, IA, 52242, USA.
(3)Department of Radiology, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, 52242, USA; 
Department of Biomedical Engineering, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, 52242, 
USA.
(4)Department of Biostatistics, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, 52242, USA; 
Department of Psychiatry, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, 52242, USA.
(5)Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, University of Iowa, Iowa 
City, IA, 52242, USA. Electronic address: michelle-voss@uiowa.edu.

Older adults have difficulty switching between competing goals with increasing 
age due to declines in executive function (EF) and changes in brain network 
connectivity, including the Cognitive Control Network (CCN). Prior research 
shows that greater global functional connectivity (GFC) in the CCN supports 
cognitive flexibility. However, it is unclear whether CCN GFC is associated with 
task-switching in older adults. Task-switching performance relies on both 
switching and working memory. Mixing cost reflects the ability to maintain and 
coordinate multiple task rules in working memory and is sensitive to age-related 
declines in EF, whereas switching cost is more closely linked to age-related 
general slowing in processing speed. This study investigates how CCN GFC relates 
to task-switching performance in older adults using two task versions. 
Participants aged 55-80 years old performed the Separate and Overlap versions 
for behavioral analyses (n = 118). Six 8-min resting-state fMRI sessions were 
collected over two days for brain behavior analyses (n = 112). Whole grey-matter 
GFC was calculated, followed by average GFC extraction from the CCN, Default 
Mode Network (DMN), and Somatomotor Network (SMN). Results showed that older 
adults were slower and less accurate in the Overlap version. Greater CCN, DMN, 
and SMN GFC were associated with smaller mixing costs in the Overlap version. 
SMN GFC was linked to larger mixing costs and smaller switching costs in the 
Separate version. Our findings suggest that greater integration of the CCN, DMN, 
and SMN, as measured by GFC, is associated with better task-switch performance 
under increasing working memory demands.

Copyright © 2026 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cortex.2026.01.002
PMCID: PMC12904565
PMID: 41619616 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest We report no 
conflict of interest.


390. J Exp Psychol Gen. 2013 May;142(2):489-509. doi: 10.1037/a0029353. Epub 2012 Jul 
30.

Eye movements reveal dynamics of task control.

Mayr U(1), Kuhns D, Rieter M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Oregon, Eugene, OR97403, USA. 
mayr@uoregon.edu

With the goal to determine the cognitive architecture that underlies flexible 
changes of control settings, we assessed within-trial and across-trial dynamics 
of attentional selection by tracking of eye movements in the context of a cued 
task-switching paradigm. Within-trial dynamics revealed a switch-induced, 
discrete delay in onset of task-congruent fixations, a result that is consistent 
with a higher level configuration process. Next, we derived predictions about 
the trial-to-trial dynamic coupling of control settings from competing models, 
assuming that control is achieved either through task-level competition or 
through higher level configuration processes. Empirical coupling dynamics 
between trial n-1 eye movements and trial n response times--estimated through 
mixed linear modeling--revealed a pattern that was consistent with the higher 
level configuration model. The results indicate that a combination of eye 
movement data and mixed modeling methods can yield new constraints on models of 
flexible control. This general approach can be useful in any domain in which 
theoretical progress depends on high-resolution information about dynamic 
relationships within individuals.

PsycINFO Database Record (c) 2013 APA, all rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1037/a0029353
PMID: 22844987 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


391. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015 Oct 6;112(40):12522-7. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.1510662112. Epub 2015 Sep 14.

Musical expertise is related to altered functional connectivity during 
audiovisual integration.

Paraskevopoulos E(1), Kraneburg A(2), Herholz SC(3), Bamidis PD(4), Pantev C(5).

Author information:
(1)School of Medicine, Faculty of Health Sciences, Aristotle University of 
Thessaloniki, 54124 Thessaloniki, Greece; Institute for Biomagnetism and 
Biosignalanalysis, University of Münster, 48149 Münster, Germany;
(2)Institute for Biomagnetism and Biosignalanalysis, University of Münster, 
48149 Münster, Germany; Research Group of Chronobiology, Leibniz Research Center 
for Working Enviroment and Human Factors, Dortmund, 44139 North 
Rhine-Westphalia, Germany;
(3)German Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases, 53175 Bonn, Germany.
(4)School of Medicine, Faculty of Health Sciences, Aristotle University of 
Thessaloniki, 54124 Thessaloniki, Greece;
(5)Institute for Biomagnetism and Biosignalanalysis, University of Münster, 
48149 Münster, Germany; pantev@uni-muenster.de.

The present study investigated the cortical large-scale functional network 
underpinning audiovisual integration via magnetoencephalographic recordings. The 
reorganization of this network related to long-term musical training was 
investigated by comparing musicians to nonmusicians. Connectivity was calculated 
on the basis of the estimated mutual information of the sources' activity, and 
the corresponding networks were statistically compared. Nonmusicians' results 
indicated that the cortical network associated with audiovisual integration 
supports visuospatial processing and attentional shifting, whereas a sparser 
network, related to spatial awareness supports the identification of audiovisual 
incongruences. In contrast, musicians' results showed enhanced connectivity in 
regions related to the identification of auditory pattern violations. Hence, 
nonmusicians rely on the processing of visual clues for the integration of 
audiovisual information, whereas musicians rely mostly on the corresponding 
auditory information. The large-scale cortical network underpinning multisensory 
integration is reorganized due to expertise in a cognitive domain that largely 
involves audiovisual integration, indicating long-term training-related 
neuroplasticity.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1510662112
PMCID: PMC4603494
PMID: 26371305 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


392. Neuroimage. 2013 Dec;83:174-88. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2013.06.041. Epub 2013 
Jun 19.

Tackling the multifunctional nature of Broca's region meta-analytically: 
co-activation-based parcellation of area 44.

Clos M(1), Amunts K, Laird AR, Fox PT, Eickhoff SB.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Neuroscience and Medicine (INM-1), Research Centre Jülich, 
Germany. Electronic address: m.clos@fz-juelich.de.

Cytoarchitectonic area 44 of Broca's region in the left inferior frontal gyrus 
is known to be involved in several functional domains including language, action 
and music processing. We investigated whether this functional heterogeneity is 
reflected in distinct modules within cytoarchitectonically defined left area 44 
using meta-analytic connectivity-based parcellation (CBP). This method relies on 
identifying the whole-brain co-activation pattern for each area 44 voxel across 
a wide range of functional neuroimaging experiments and subsequently grouping 
the voxels into distinct clusters based on the similarity of their co-activation 
patterns. This CBP analysis revealed that five separate clusters exist within 
left area 44. A post-hoc functional characterization and functional connectivity 
analysis of these five clusters was then performed. The two posterior clusters 
were primarily associated with action processes, in particular with phonology 
and overt speech (posterior-dorsal cluster) and with rhythmic sequencing 
(posterior-ventral cluster). The three anterior clusters were primarily 
associated with language and cognition, in particular with working memory 
(anterior-dorsal cluster), with detection of meaning (anterior-ventral cluster) 
and with task switching/cognitive control (inferior frontal junction cluster). 
These five clusters furthermore showed specific and distinct connectivity 
patterns. The results demonstrate that left area 44 is heterogeneous, thus 
supporting anatomical data on the molecular architecture of this region, and 
provide a basis for more specific interpretations of activations localized in 
area 44.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2013.06.041
PMCID: PMC4791055
PMID: 23791915 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest There is no confiict of 
interest.


393. Neuroimage. 2008 Jul 15;41(4):1462-70. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2008.03.043. 
Epub 2008 Apr 4.

On the functional role of temporal and frontal cortex activation in passive 
detection of auditory deviance.

Tse CY(1), Penney TB.

Author information:
(1)Beckman Institute and Department of Psychology, The University of Illinois at 
Urbana Champaign, USA.

The superior temporal cortex (STC) and inferior frontal cortex (IFC) are active 
during pre-attentive change detection. According to one influential model, the 
temporal cortex is responsible for memory trace comparison and the frontal 
cortex for attention switching. However, fMRI studies that used parametric 
designs revealed frontal cortex activity that is inconsistent with this model. 
In response, alternative accounts of frontal cortex activity, such as contrast 
enhancement and response inhibition, have been suggested. In this study, we 
measured the event related potential (ERP) and event related optical signal 
(EROS) responses elicited by pitch deviants in a parametric design. The ERP 
results revealed the typical modulation of mismatch negativity (MMN) amplitude 
by degree of deviance. The EROS results showed a similar modulation effect in 
the temporal cortex and a general temporal cortex followed by frontal cortex 
activation pattern. Interestingly, medium deviants elicited a greater frontal 
EROS response than did large or small deviants. Moreover, regression analyses 
showed that the EROS measures, specifically the linear trend in the temporal 
cortex and the inverse quadratic trend in the frontal cortex, correlated with 
the linear trend of the ERP MMN response. Taken together, these results indicate 
that 1) deviance magnitude modulates the brain activity elicited by pitch 
stimuli in the STC and IFC within the same time range as electrophysiological 
measures of passive deviance detection, 2) EROS measures of deviance detection 
are highly correlated with the ERP MMN, and 3) the functional relationship of 
STC and IFC is consistent with both the contrast enhancement and response 
inhibition accounts of IFC activity in passive deviance detection.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2008.03.043
PMID: 18474433 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


394. J Neurosci. 2004 Feb 4;24(5):1173-81. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4011-03.2004.

Functional magnetic resonance imaging examination of two modular architectures 
for switching multiple internal models.

Imamizu H(1), Kuroda T, Yoshioka T, Kawato M.

Author information:
(1)Advanced Telecommunications Research Institute Computational Neuroscience 
Laboratories, Keihanna Science City, Kyoto 619-0288, Japan. imamizu@atr.co.jp

An internal model is a neural mechanism that can mimic the input-output 
properties of a controlled object such as a tool. Recent research interests have 
moved on to how multiple internal models are learned and switched under a given 
context of behavior. Two representative computational models for task switching 
propose distinct neural mechanisms, thus predicting different brain activity 
patterns in the switching of internal models. In one model, called the 
mixture-of-experts architecture, switching is commanded by a single executive 
called a "gating network," which is different from the internal models. In the 
other model, called the MOSAIC (MOdular Selection And Identification for 
Control), the internal models themselves play crucial roles in switching. 
Consequently, the mixture-of-experts model predicts that neural activities 
related to switching and internal models can be temporally and spatially 
segregated, whereas the MOSAIC model predicts that they are closely 
intermingled. Here, we directly examined the two predictions by analyzing 
functional magnetic resonance imaging activities during the switching of one 
common tool (an ordinary computer mouse) and two novel tools: a rotated mouse, 
the cursor of which appears in a rotated position, and a velocity mouse, the 
cursor velocity of which is proportional to the mouse position. The switching 
and internal model activities temporally and spatially overlapped each other in 
the cerebellum and in the parietal cortex, whereas the overlap was very small in 
the frontal cortex. These results suggest that switching mechanisms in the 
frontal cortex can be explained by the mixture-of-experts architecture, whereas 
those in the cerebellum and the parietal cortex are explained by the MOSAIC 
model.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4011-03.2004
PMCID: PMC6793589
PMID: 14762135 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


395. Front Aging Neurosci. 2015 Oct 9;7:194. doi: 10.3389/fnagi.2015.00194. 
eCollection 2015.

White matter microstructure contributes to age-related declines in task-induced 
deactivation of the default mode network.

Brown CA(1), Hakun JG(1), Zhu Z(1), Johnson NF(2), Gold BT(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology, University of Kentucky College of 
Medicine, Lexington, KY, USA.
(2)Department of Rehabilitation Sciences, University of Kentucky Lexington, KY, 
USA.
(3)Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology, University of Kentucky College of 
Medicine, Lexington, KY, USA ; Sanders-Brown Center on Aging, University of 
Kentucky Lexington, KY, USA ; Magnetic Resonance and Imaging and Spectroscopy 
Center, University of Kentucky Lexington, KY, USA.

Task-induced deactivations within the brain's default mode network (DMN) are 
thought to reflect suppression of endogenous thought processes to support 
exogenous goal-directed task processes. Older adults are known to show 
reductions in deactivation of the DMN compared to younger adults. However, 
little is understood about the mechanisms contributing to functional 
dysregulation of the DMN in aging. Here, we explored the relationships between 
functional modulation of the DMN and age, task performance and white matter (WM) 
microstructure. Participants were 117 adults ranging from 25 to 83 years old who 
completed an fMRI task switching paradigm, including easy (single) and difficult 
(mixed) conditions, and underwent diffusion tensor imaging (DTI). The fMRI 
results revealed an age by condition interaction (β = -0.13, t = -3.16, p = 
0.002) such that increasing age affected deactivation magnitude during the mixed 
condition (β = -0.29, t = -3.24 p = 0.002) but not the single condition (p = 
0.58). Additionally, there was a WM by condition interaction (β = 0.10, t = 
2.33, p = 0.02) such that decreasing WM microstructure affected deactivation 
magnitude during the mixed condition (β = 0.30, t = 3.42 p = 0.001) but not the 
single condition (p = 0.17). Critically, mediation analyses indicated that 
age-related reductions in WM microstructure accounted for the relationship 
between age and DMN deactivation in the more difficult mixed condition. These 
findings suggest that age-related declines in anatomical connectivity between 
DMN regions contribute to functional dysregulation within the DMN in older 
adults.

DOI: 10.3389/fnagi.2015.00194
PMCID: PMC4598480
PMID: 26500549


396. Brain Res. 2011 Nov 14;1423:41-52. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2011.09.018. Epub 
2011 Sep 22.

Electrophysiological correlates of preparation and implementation for different 
types of task shifts.

Hsieh S(1), Wu M.

Author information:
(1)Cognitive Electrophysiology Laboratory, Department of Psychology and 
Institute of Allied Health Sciences, National Cheng Kung University, Tainan, 
Taiwan. psyhsl@mail.ncku.edu.tw

The ability to flexibly shift between tasks is central to cognitive control, but 
whether the same brain mechanisms mediate shifting across different tasks is 
unknown. In this study, we investigated whether variations in 
stimulus-dimensions or response-mapping might influence task switching in terms 
of its preparatory processes, as reflected in cue-locked event-related 
potentials (ERPs), and its implementation processes, as reflected in 
stimulus-locked ERPs. Participants judged pairs of digits as same or different 
in one of two conditions. In one condition, the task-relevant stimulus-dimension 
was either repeated or switched across trials while the response-mapping rule 
was kept constant. In the other condition, the task-relevant stimulus-dimension 
was kept constant while the response-mapping rule was repeated or switched 
across trials. The length of the preparatory interval was manipulated. Data 
revealed switch-related preparatory ERP components (including N2 and a late slow 
positivity) that were associated with both types of task shifting and an 
N400-like negativity that distinguished between the two types. Several 
switch-related implementation ERP components associated with both types of task 
shifting were found at posterior sites. Distinct frontal modulations of the N1, 
P2, and N2 were found to associate with the implementation of the 
response-mapping shift, whereas a slow positivity was associated with the 
implementation of the stimulus-dimension shift. Therefore, this study 
demonstrates that there are shared and distinct processes across different types 
of task shifting. Finally, because the same transition-cue was used for 
different task shifts, the distinct processes cannot be explained simply by 
differences in cue processing.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.brainres.2011.09.018
PMID: 22000079 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


397. Psychiatry Res Neuroimaging. 2026 Mar;356:112105. doi: 
10.1016/j.pscychresns.2025.112105. Epub 2025 Dec 8.

Cognitive modes underlying attentional control deficits in schizophrenia: A 
functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) study.

Momeni A(1), Metzak P(2), Evora M(3), Momeni A(3), Lu A(3), Hsiao H(4), Woodward 
TS(3).

Author information:
(1)BC Mental Health and Addictions Research Institute, Vancouver, Canada; 
Department of Psychiatry, Faculty of Medicine, University of British Columbia, 
Vancouver, Canada. Electronic address: ava.momeni@ubc.ca.
(2)Department of Psychiatry, Hotchkiss Brain Institute, University of Calgary, 
Calgary, Canada.
(3)BC Mental Health and Addictions Research Institute, Vancouver, Canada; 
Department of Psychiatry, Faculty of Medicine, University of British Columbia, 
Vancouver, Canada.
(4)Faculty of Medicine, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada.

The current functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) study examined the 
anatomical and functional patterns associated with attentional control deficits 
in schizophrenia. Participants completed a trivalent task switching paradigm in 
which they alternatively completed three tasks (i.e., identify colour, parity, 
or letter case), while viewing stimuli with one (univalent), two (bivalent), or 
three (trivalent) dimension(s). This required participants to counteract their 
attentional capture by biasing their attention away from up to two 
task-irrelevant dimensions. Three cognitive modes emerged via constrained 
principal component analysis (CPCA): (1) Multiple Demand (MD), (2) Language 
(LAN), and (3) Default Mode B (DM-B). Relative to neurotypical participants, 
patients with schizophrenia showed impaired task performance, muted but 
sustained activation of the MD mode, hypoactivation of the LAN mode, and 
hyperdeactivation of the DM-B mode. Moreover, the muted and sustained activation 
of the MD mode was associated with higher scores on hallucinations and 
delusions, while the hypoactivation of the LAN mode and the hyperdeactivation of 
the DM-B mode were associated with higher scores on poverty of speech and 
flattened affect. Thus, attentional biasing impairments in schizophrenia may 
reflect reduced engagement of task-positive MD and LAN modes and excessive 
suppression of task-negative DM-B mode, with mode-specific associations to 
symptom severity.

Copyright © 2025. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pscychresns.2025.112105
PMID: 41406669 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare no financial or conflicts of interest.


398. Neuroimage. 2019 Jan 15;185:471-478. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2018.10.064. Epub 
2018 Oct 25.

Genetic predisposition for inflammation exacerbates effects of striatal iron 
content on cognitive switching ability in healthy aging.

Daugherty AM(1), Hoagey DA(2), Kennedy KM(2), Rodrigue KM(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral 
Neurosciences, Institute of Gerontology, Wayne State University, Detroit, MI, 
USA.
(2)Center for Vital Longevity, School of Behavioral and Brain Sciences, The 
University of Texas at Dallas, Dallas, TX, USA.
(3)Center for Vital Longevity, School of Behavioral and Brain Sciences, The 
University of Texas at Dallas, Dallas, TX, USA. Electronic address: 
krodrigue@utdallas.edu.

Non-heme iron homeostasis interacts with inflammation bidirectionally, and both 
contribute to age-related decline in brain structure and function via oxidative 
stress. Thus, individuals with genetic predisposition for inflammation may be at 
greater risk for brain iron accumulation during aging and more vulnerable to 
cognitive decline. We examine this hypothesis in a lifespan sample of healthy 
adults (N = 183, age 20-94 years) who underwent R2*-weighted magnetic resonance 
imaging to estimate regional iron content and genotyping of interleukin-1beta 
(IL-1β), a pro-inflammatory cytokine for which the T allelle of the single 
nucleotide polymorphism increases risk for chronic neuroinflammation. Older age 
was associated with greater striatal iron content that in turn accounted for 
poorer cognitive switching performance. Heterozygote IL-1β T-carriers 
demonstrated poorer switching performance in relation to striatal iron content 
as compared to IL-1β C/C counterparts, despite the two groups being of similar 
age. With increasing genetic inflammation risk, homozygote IL-1β T/T carriers 
had lesser age-related variance in striatal iron content as compared to the 
other groups but showed a similar association of greater striatal iron content 
predicting poorer cognitive switching. Non-heme iron and inflammation, although 
necessary for normal neuronal function, both promote oxidative stress that when 
accumulated in excess, drives a complex mechanism of neural and cognitive 
decline in aging.

Copyright © 2018 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2018.10.064
PMCID: PMC6301022
PMID: 30395929 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


399. Neuroimage. 2014 Nov 15;102 Pt 2:474-83. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2014.08.008. 
Epub 2014 Aug 12.

Association of creative achievement with cognitive flexibility by a combined 
voxel-based morphometry and resting-state functional connectivity study.

Chen Q(1), Yang W(1), Li W(1), Wei D(1), Li H(1), Lei Q(1), Zhang Q(2), Qiu 
J(3).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Cognition and Personality (Ministry of Education), 
Chongqing 400715, China; School of Psychology, Southwest University, Chongqing 
400715, China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Cognition and Personality (Ministry of Education), 
Chongqing 400715, China; School of Psychology, Southwest University, Chongqing 
400715, China. Electronic address: zhangql@swu.edu.cn.
(3)Key Laboratory of Cognition and Personality (Ministry of Education), 
Chongqing 400715, China; School of Psychology, Southwest University, Chongqing 
400715, China. Electronic address: qiuj318@swu.edu.cn.

Although researchers generally concur that creativity involves the production of 
novel and useful products, the neural basis of creativity remains elusive due to 
the complexity of the cognitive processes involved. Recent studies have shown 
that highly creative individuals displayed more cognitive flexibility. However, 
direct evidence supporting the relationship between creativity and cognitive 
flexibility has rarely been investigated using both structural and functional 
neuroimaging techniques. We used a combined voxel-based morphometry and 
resting-state functional connectivity (rsFC) analysis to investigate the 
relationship between individual creativity ability assessed by the creative 
achievement questionnaire (CAQ), and regional gray matter volume (GMV), as well 
as intrinsic functional connectivity. Results showed that CAQ scores negatively 
correlated with GMV in the rostral anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) and the 
bilateral dorsal ACC (dACC) extending to supplementary motor area, but 
positively correlated with GMV in the bilateral superior frontal gyrus and 
ventral medial prefrontal cortex (vmPFC). Further functional connectivity 
analysis revealed that higher creative achievement was inversely associated with 
the strength of rsFC between the dACC and medial superior frontal gyrus (mSFG), 
right middle frontal gyrus, and left orbito-frontal insula. Moreover, the 
association between the dACC-mSFG connectivity and CAQ scores was mediated by 
cognitive flexibility, assessed by a task-switching paradigm. These findings 
indicate that individual differences in creative achievement are associated with 
both brain structure and corresponding intrinsic functional connectivity 
involved in cognitive flexibility and deliberate creative processing. 
Furthermore, dACC-mSFG connectivity may affect creative achievement through its 
impact on cognitive flexibility.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2014.08.008
PMID: 25123973 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


400. Nutrients. 2020 Nov 14;12(11):3513. doi: 10.3390/nu12113513.

Choline Plus Working Memory Training Improves Prenatal Alcohol-Induced Deficits 
in Cognitive Flexibility and Functional Connectivity in Adulthood in Rats.

Waddell J(1), Hill E(1), Tang S(2), Jiang L(2), Xu S(2), Mooney SM(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Neonatology, Department of Pediatrics, University of Maryland 
School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21201, USA.
(2)Department of Diagnostic Radiology and Nuclear Medicine, University of 
Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21201, USA.
(3)Department of Nutrition, Nutrition Research Institute, University of North 
Carolina at Chapel Hill, Kannapolis, NC 28081, USA.

Fetal alcohol spectrum disorder (FASD) is the leading known cause of 
intellectual disability, and may manifest as deficits in cognitive function, 
including working memory. Working memory capacity and accuracy increases during 
adolescence when neurons in the prefrontal cortex undergo refinement. Rats 
exposed to low doses of ethanol prenatally show deficits in working memory 
during adolescence, and in cognitive flexibility in young adulthood. The 
cholinergic system plays a crucial role in learning and memory processes. Here 
we report that the combination of choline and training on a working memory task 
during adolescence significantly improved cognitive flexibility (performance on 
an attentional set shifting task) in young adulthood: 92% of all females and 81% 
of control males formed an attentional set, but only 36% of ethanol-exposed 
males did. Resting state functional magnetic resonance imaging showed that 
functional connectivity among brain regions was different between the sexes, and 
was altered by prenatal ethanol exposure and by choline + training. 
Connectivity, particularly between prefrontal cortex and striatum, was also 
different in males that formed a set compared with those that did not. Together, 
these findings indicate that prenatal exposure to low doses of ethanol has 
persistent effects on brain functional connectivity and behavior, that these 
effects are sex-dependent, and that an adolescent intervention could mitigate 
some of the effects of prenatal ethanol exposure.

DOI: 10.3390/nu12113513
PMCID: PMC7696837
PMID: 33202683 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


401. J Neurosci. 2011 Oct 12;31(41):14688-92. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2390-11.2011.

Adjustments of response threshold during task switching: a model-based 
functional magnetic resonance imaging study.

Mansfield EL(1), Karayanidis F, Jamadar S, Heathcote A, Forstmann BU.

Author information:
(1)School of Psychology, University of Newcastle, Newcastle, New South Wales, 
2308, Australia.

Adjustment of response threshold for speed compared with accuracy instructions 
in two-choice decision-making tasks is associated with activation in the 
fronto-striatal network, including the pre-supplementary motor area (pre-SMA) 
and striatum (Forstmann et al., 2008). In contrast, increased response 
conservativeness is associated with activation of the subthalamic nucleus (STN) 
(Frank et al., 2007). We investigated the involvement of these regions in 
trial-by-trial adjustments of response threshold in humans, using a cued-trials 
task-switching paradigm. Fully and partially informative switch cues produced 
more conservative thresholds than repeat cues. Repeat cues were associated with 
higher activation in pre-SMA and striatum than switch cues. For all cue types, 
individual variability in response threshold was associated with activation 
level in pre-SMA, with higher activation linked to lower threshold setting. In 
the striatum, this relationship was found for repeat cues only. These findings 
support the notion that pre-SMA biases the striatum to lower response threshold 
under more liberal response regimens. In contrast, a high threshold for switch 
cues was associated with greater activation in right STN, consistent with 
increasing response caution under conservative response regimens. We conclude 
that neural models of response threshold adjustment can help explain executive 
control processes in task switching.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2390-11.2011
PMCID: PMC6703389
PMID: 21994385 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


402. Brain. 1998 May;121 ( Pt 5):815-42. doi: 10.1093/brain/121.5.815.

Dissociating executive mechanisms of task control following frontal lobe damage 
and Parkinson's disease.

Rogers RD(1), Sahakian BJ, Hodges JR, Polkey CE, Kennard C, Robbins TW.

Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental Psychology, University of Cambridge, UK.

Twelve patients with focal damage of the frontal cortex and 12 patients with 
mild, medicated, early stage Parkinson's disease switched between letter- and 
digit=naming tasks on every second trial of a task-switching paradigm. Compared 
with age- and IQ-matched control performance, patients with left-sided, but not 
right-sided, frontal damage exhibited markedly increased time costs associated 
with these predictable switches only when there was a general incidence of 
interference or 'crosstalk' between the tasks, and particularly so when the 
available task cues were relatively weak and arbitrary. The same patients also 
showed evidence of an increased sensitivity to the facilitatory and inhibitory 
effects of previous processing, when required to switch between tasks. Both 
groups of patients (with left- or right-sided frontal damage) exhibited slow, 
disorganized performance early in practice. In contrast to these frontal 
effects, the Parkinson's disease patients showed little indication of larger 
time costs of task switches but they did show progressive increases in the error 
costs, while age- and IQ-matched control subjects showed reductions. We propose 
that while both left and right frontal cortical areas are involved in the 
organization of cognitive and motor processes in situations involving novel task 
demands, only the left frontal cortex is involved in the dynamic reconfiguring 
between already-established task-sets, and specifically, that it is the site of 
an executive mechanism responsible for the modulation of exogenous task-set 
activity. Finally, dopaminergic transmission, along the nigrostriatal pathway, 
may be implicated in sustaining various cognitive and motor processes over 
prolonged periods, including the operation of those executive control mechanisms 
that accomplish reconfiguring between task-sets.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/121.5.815
PMID: 9619187 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


403. Brain Imaging Behav. 2020 Jun;14(3):753-761. doi: 10.1007/s11682-018-0013-z.

Altered functional connectivity patterns of insular subregions in major 
depressive disorder after electroconvulsive therapy.

Wang L(1)(2), Wei Q(3), Wang C(4), Xu J(5), Wang K(3)(6)(7)(8), Tian Y(9), Wang 
J(10)(11).

Author information:
(1)The Clinical Hospital of Chengdu Brain Science Institute, MOE Key Lab for 
Neuroinformation, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, 
Chengdu, 625014, China.
(2)School of life Science and technology, University of Electronic Science and 
Technology of China, Chengdu, 625014, China.
(3)Department of Neurology, The First Hospital of Anhui Medical University, 
Hefei, 230022, China.
(4)College of Psychology and Sociology, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen, 518060, 
China.
(5)Institute of Biomedical and Health Engineering, Shenzhen Institutes of 
Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shenzhen, 518055, China.
(6)Department of Medical Psychology, Anhui Medical University, Hefei, 230022, 
China.
(7)Anhui Province Key Laboratory of Cognition and Neuropsychiatric Disorders, 
Hefei, 230022, China.
(8)Collaborative Innovation Center for Neuropsychiatric Disorders and Mental 
Health, Hefei, 230022, China.
(9)Department of Neurology, The First Hospital of Anhui Medical University, 
Hefei, 230022, China. ayfytyh@126.com.
(10)The Clinical Hospital of Chengdu Brain Science Institute, MOE Key Lab for 
Neuroinformation, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, 
Chengdu, 625014, China. jiaojianwang@uestc.edu.cn.
(11)School of life Science and technology, University of Electronic Science and 
Technology of China, Chengdu, 625014, China. jiaojianwang@uestc.edu.cn.

Although electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) is an efficient treatment for major 
depressive disorder (MDD), however, it also brings memory impairment. The insula 
is a critical brain structure for coordinating affective, cognitive memory, 
saliency processing, and attention switching suggesting functional activity of 
insula maybe an important indicator to delineate the treatment and side effects 
of ECT. Here, Resting-state functional connectivity analyses of insular 
subregions were performed to reveal the changes of connectivity in 23 MDD 
patients before and after ECT and 25 healthy control (HC) and identified 
significantly increased functional connectivity of the right ventral anterior 
insular subregion with bilateral caudate, angular gyrus, and dorsolateral 
prefrontal cortex after ECT. Granger causality analyses identified significantly 
increased effective connectivity from dorsolateral prefrontal cortex to right 
angular gyrus in MDD patients after ECT. Furthermore, increased effective 
connectivity from dorsolateral prefrontal cortex to right angular gyrus 
exhibited significantly positive correlation with changed Hamilton Rating Scale 
for Depression scores. These results showed that ECT can normalize abnormal 
functional connectivity and effective connectivity in MDD. Our findings also 
indicated that the right ventral anterior insula and effective connectivity from 
dorsolateral prefrontal cortex to right angular gyrus are biomarkers of 
antidepressant effects during ECT of MDD.

DOI: 10.1007/s11682-018-0013-z
PMID: 30610527 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


404. Int J Psychophysiol. 2020 Jul;153:80-90. doi: 10.1016/j.ijpsycho.2020.04.020. 
Epub 2020 Apr 28.

New insights into the neural basis of cognitive control: An event-related fMRI 
study of task selection processes.

Abou-Ghazaleh A(1), Khateb A(2), Kroll JF(3).

Author information:
(1)The Unit for the Study of Arabic Language, Edmond J. Safra Brain Research 
Center for the Study of Learning Disabilities, Faculty of Education, University 
of Haifa, Haifa, Israel; Dept of Learning Disabilities, Faculty of Education, 
University of Haifa, Haifa, Israel.
(2)The Unit for the Study of Arabic Language, Edmond J. Safra Brain Research 
Center for the Study of Learning Disabilities, Faculty of Education, University 
of Haifa, Haifa, Israel; Dept of Learning Disabilities, Faculty of Education, 
University of Haifa, Haifa, Israel. Electronic address: akhateb@edu.haifa.ac.il.
(3)Dept of Language Science, University of California, Irvine, CA, USA.

To investigate cognitive control, researchers have repeatedly employed task 
switching paradigms. The comparison of switch relative to repeat trials reveals 
longer response times and higher error rates, a pattern that has been 
interpreted as switching costs. Functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) 
studies have shown the involvement of different brain modules in switching 
conditions, including prefrontal and parietal regions together with other 
sub-cortical structures. In this study, the aim was to shed light on the brain 
basis of cognitive control using an approach that proved useful in previous 
studies investigating language control in bilinguals. We examined adult 
participants in one simple color naming context and two task selection mixed 
contexts. In the first mixed selection context, participants named the color or 
the shape of the stimulus based on a cue word. In the second, they named the 
color or the size of the stimulus. It was assumed that the comparison of brain 
responses to the same color naming in mixed selection contexts vs. in 
non-selection context will reveal the of engagement of cognitive control/task 
selection processes. Whole brain analysis of color naming in the different 
contexts showed a significant main effect of context. The comparison of brain 
responses in several frontal, parietal and sub-cortical regions, of which some 
are supposedly involved in cognitive control, demonstrated an increased 
activation during color naming in mixed relative the simple non-mixed context. 
The different cognitive control modules described in this study fit with recent 
bilingual language control and domain general cognitive models.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijpsycho.2020.04.020
PMID: 32360750 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


405. Behav Brain Res. 2014 Nov 1;274:95-107. doi: 10.1016/j.bbr.2014.07.054. Epub 
2014 Aug 6.

Neural basis of postural focus effect on concurrent postural and motor tasks: 
phase-locked electroencephalogram responses.

Huang CY(1), Zhao CG(2), Hwang IS(3).

Author information:
(1)School and Graduate Institute of Physical Therapy, College of Medicine, 
National Taiwan University, Taipei 100, Taiwan; Physical Therapy Center, 
National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei 100, Taiwan.
(2)Department of Physical Therapy, College of Medicine, National Cheng Kung 
University, Tainan 701, Taiwan.
(3)Department of Physical Therapy, College of Medicine, National Cheng Kung 
University, Tainan 701, Taiwan; Institute of Allied Health Sciences, College of 
Medicine, National Cheng Kung University, Tainan 701, Taiwan. Electronic 
address: ishwang@mail.ncku.edu.tw.

Dual-task performance is strongly affected by the direction of attentional 
focus. This study investigated neural control of a postural-suprapostural 
procedure when postural focus strategy varied. Twelve adults concurrently 
conducted force-matching and maintained stabilometer stance with visual feedback 
on ankle movement (visual internal focus, VIF) and on stabilometer movement 
(visual external focus, VEF). Force-matching error, dynamics of ankle and 
stabilometer movements, and event-related potentials (ERPs) were registered. 
Postural control with VEF caused superior force-matching performance, more 
complex ankle movement, and stronger kinematic coupling between the ankle and 
stabilometer movements than postural control with VIF. The postural focus 
strategy also altered ERP temporal-spatial patterns. Postural control with VEF 
resulted in later N1 with less negativity around the bilateral fronto-central 
and contralateral sensorimotor areas, earlier P2 deflection with more positivity 
around the bilateral fronto-central and ipsilateral temporal areas, and late 
movement-related potential commencing in the left frontal-central area, as 
compared with postural control with VIF. The time-frequency distribution of the 
ERP principal component revealed phase-locked neural oscillations in the delta 
(1-4Hz), theta (4-7Hz), and beta (13-35Hz) rhythms. The delta and theta rhythms 
were more pronounced prior to the timing of P2 positive deflection, and beta 
rebound was greater after the completion of force-matching in VEF condition than 
VIF condition. This study is the first to reveal the neural correlation of 
postural focusing effect on a postural-suprapostural task. Postural control with 
VEF takes advantage of efficient task-switching to facilitate autonomous 
postural response, in agreement with the "constrained-action" hypothesis.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbr.2014.07.054
PMID: 25108245 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


406. J Neurosci. 2012 Jun 20;32(25):8434-42. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5468-11.2012.

Anterior prefrontal cortex contributes to action selection through tracking of 
recent reward trends.

Kovach CK(1), Daw ND, Rudrauf D, Tranel D, O'Doherty JP, Adolphs R.

Author information:
(1)Division of Humanities and Social Sciences, California Institute of 
Technology, Pasadena, California 91125, USA. christopher-kovach@uiowa.edu

The functions of prefrontal cortex remain enigmatic, especially for its anterior 
sectors, putatively ranging from planning to self-initiated behavior, social 
cognition, task switching, and memory. A predominant current theory regarding 
the most anterior sector, the frontopolar cortex (FPC), is that it is involved 
in exploring alternative courses of action, but the detailed causal mechanisms 
remain unknown. Here we investigated this issue using the lesion method, 
together with a novel model-based analysis. Eight patients with anterior 
prefrontal brain lesions including the FPC performed a four-armed bandit task 
known from neuroimaging studies to activate the FPC. Model-based analyses of 
learning demonstrated a selective deficit in the ability to extrapolate the most 
recent trend, despite an intact general ability to learn from past rewards. 
Whereas both brain-damaged and healthy controls used comparisons between the two 
most recent choice outcomes to infer trends that influenced their decision about 
the next choice, the group with anterior prefrontal lesions showed a complete 
absence of this component and instead based their choice entirely on the 
cumulative reward history. Given that the FPC is thought to be the most 
evolutionarily recent expansion of primate prefrontal cortex, we suggest that 
its function may reflect uniquely human adaptations to select and update models 
of reward contingency in dynamic environments.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5468-11.2012
PMCID: PMC3425366
PMID: 22723683 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


407. J Cogn Neurosci. 2006 Mar;18(3):388-98. doi: 10.1162/089892906775990589.

Voluntary selection of task sets revealed by functional magnetic resonance 
imaging.

Forstmann BU(1), Brass M, Koch I, von Cramon DY.

Author information:
(1)Max Planck Institute for Human Cognitive and Brain Sciences, Germany. 
forstman@cbs.mpg.de

In everyday life, we have to selectively adapt our behavior to different 
situations and tasks. In cognitive psychology, such adaptive behavior can be 
investigated with the task-switching paradigm. However, in contrast to everyday 
life, in experiments participants are unequivocally told which task to perform. 
The present functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) study was set out to 
investigate processes that are relevant when participants can decide by their 
own which task to perform. The number of tasks to choose from was varied between 
a forced condition (no choice) and two voluntary selection conditions (two or 
three choices). We expected to find prolonged reaction times as well as higher 
activations within the midcingulate cortex for the choice conditions compared to 
the no-choice condition. The fMRI results revealed a significant activation 
difference for the choice conditions versus the no-choice condition. For the 
choice contrast, activation was found in the rostral cingulate zone (RCZ) as 
well as the superior parietal lobule and the posterior part of the intraparietal 
sulcus. These activations revealed no selection-specific difference between 
three and two choices. Finally, a post hoc analysis showed that the activation 
in the RCZ is not associated with higher task-dependent response conflict when 
participants can select a task set. Taken together, these findings indicate that 
distinct brain areas are involved in the voluntary selection of abstract task 
set information.

DOI: 10.1162/089892906775990589
PMID: 16513004 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


408. J Neurosci. 2010 Oct 20;30(42):14205-12. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1062-10.2010.

Frontostriatal involvement in task switching depends on genetic differences in 
d2 receptor density.

Stelzel C(1), Basten U, Montag C, Reuter M, Fiebach CJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Heidelberg, D-69117 Heidelberg, 
Germany. christine.stelzel@charite.de

Recent studies suggest an association of dopamine D2 receptor (DRD2) 
availability with flexibility in reward-based learning. We extend these results 
by demonstrating an association of genetically based differences in DRD2 density 
with the ability to intentionally switch between nonrewarded tasks: noncarriers 
of the A1 allele of the DRD2/ANKK1-TaqIa polymorphism, associated with higher 
DRD2 density, show increased task-switching costs, increased prefrontal 
switching activity in the inferior frontal junction area, and increased 
functional connectivity in dorsal frontostriatal circuits, relative to A1 allele 
carriers. A DRD2 haplotype analysis in the same sample confirmed these results, 
indicating an association between high D2 density and increased task-switching 
effort. Our results provide evidence that converges with that from association 
studies relating increased D2 density to deficits in cognitive flexibility in 
schizophrenia. We suggest that individual differences in striatal D2 signaling 
in healthy humans modulate goal-directed gating to prefrontal cortex, thus 
leading to individual differences in switching intentionally to newly relevant 
behaviors.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1062-10.2010
PMCID: PMC6634769
PMID: 20962241 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


409. Neuroimage. 2018 May 15;172:146-161. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2018.01.030. Epub 
2018 Feb 3.

Age-related differences in BOLD modulation to cognitive control costs in a 
multitasking paradigm: Global switch, local switch, and compatibility-switch 
costs.

Nashiro K(1), Qin S(2), O'Connell MA(2), Basak C(3).

Author information:
(1)University of Southern California, United States.
(2)Center for Vital Longevity, University of Texas at Dallas, United States.
(3)Center for Vital Longevity, University of Texas at Dallas, United States. 
Electronic address: cbasak@utdallas.edu.

It is well documented that older adults recruit additional brain regions 
compared to those recruited by younger adults while performing a wide variety of 
cognitive tasks. However, it is unclear how such age-related over-recruitment 
interacts with different types of cognitive control, and whether this 
over-recruitment is compensatory. To test this, we used a multitasking paradigm, 
which allowed us to examine age-related over-activation associated with three 
types of cognitive costs (i.e., global switch, local switch, 
compatibility-switch costs). We found age-related impairments in global switch 
cost (GSC), evidenced by slower response times for maintaining and coordinating 
two tasks vs. performing only one task. However, no age-related declines were 
observed in either local switch cost (LSC), a cognitive cost associated with 
switching between the two tasks while maintaining two task loads, or 
compatibility-switch cost (CSC), a cognitive cost associated with incompatible 
vs. compatible stimulus-response mappings across the two tasks. The fMRI 
analyses allowed for identification of distinct cognitive cost-sensitive brain 
regions associated with GSC and LSC. In fronto-parietal GSC and LSC regions, 
older adults' increased activations were associated with poorer performance 
(greater costs), whereas a reverse relationship was observed in younger adults. 
Older adults also recruited additional fronto-parietal brain regions outside the 
cognitive cost-sensitive areas, which was associated with poorer performance or 
no behavioral benefits. Our results suggest that older adults exhibit a 
combination of inefficient activation within cognitive cost-sensitive regions, 
specifically the GSC and LSC regions, and non-compensatory over-recruitment in 
age-sensitive regions. Age-related declines in global switching, compared to 
local switching, was observed earlier in old age at both neural and behavioral 
levels.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2018.01.030
PMID: 29414492 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


410. Cortex. 2013 Nov-Dec;49(10):2799-811. doi: 10.1016/j.cortex.2013.04.002. Epub 
2013 Apr 11.

Dissociable fronto-striatal effects of dopamine D2 receptor stimulation on 
cognitive versus motor flexibility.

Stelzel C(1), Fiebach CJ, Cools R, Tafazoli S, D'Esposito M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, Charité Universitätsmedizin, 
Berlin, Germany. Electronic address: christine.stelzel@charite.de.

Genetic and pharmacological studies suggest an important role of the dopamine D2 
receptor (DRD2) in flexible behavioral adaptation, mostly shown in reward-based 
learning paradigms. Recent evidence from imaging genetics indicates that also 
intentional cognitive flexibility, associated with lateral frontal cortex, is 
affected by variations in DRD2 signaling. In the present functional magnetic 
resonance imaging (MRI) study, we tested the effects of a direct pharmacological 
manipulation of DRD2 stimulation on intentional flexibility in a task-switching 
context, requiring switches between cognitive task rules and between response 
hands. In a double blind, counterbalanced design, participants received either a 
low dose of the DRD2 agonist bromocriptine or a placebo in two separate 
sessions. Bromocriptine modulated the blood-oxygen-level-dependent (BOLD) signal 
during rule switching: rule-switching-related activity in the left posterior 
lateral frontal cortex and in the striatum was increased compared to placebo, at 
comparable performance levels. Fronto-striatal connectivity under bromocriptine 
was slightly increased for rule switches compared to rule repetitions. 
Hand-switching-related activity, in contrast, was reduced under bromocriptine in 
sensorimotor regions. Our results provide converging evidence for an involvement 
of DRD2 signaling in fronto-striatal mechanisms underlying intentional 
flexibility, and indicate that the neural mechanisms underlying different types 
of flexibility (cognitive vs motor) are affected differently by increased 
dopaminergic stimulation.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cortex.2013.04.002
PMCID: PMC3795948
PMID: 23660437 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


411. J Psychopharmacol. 2021 Sep;35(9):1099-1110. doi: 10.1177/02698811211000778. 
Epub 2021 Apr 28.

Preliminary evidence for the phosphodiesterase type-4 inhibitor, roflumilast, in 
ameliorating cognitive flexibility deficits in patients with schizophrenia.

Livingston NR(1), Hawkins PC(1), Gilleen J(2)(3), Ye R(4), Valdearenas L(5), 
Shergill SS(3), Mehta MA(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroimaging, King's College London, London, UK.
(2)Department of Psychology, University of Roehampton, London, UK.
(3)Department of Psychosis Studies, King's College London, London, UK.
(4)Department of Clinical Neurosciences, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.
(5)North Middlesex University Hospital, Barnet, Enfield and Haringey Mental 
Health NHS Trust, London, UK.

BACKGROUND: Cognitive flexibility deficits are present in patients with 
schizophrenia and are strong predictors of functional outcome but, as yet, have 
no pharmacological treatments.
AIMS: The purpose of this study was to investigate whether the phosphodiesterase 
type-4 inhibitor, roflumilast, can improve cognitive flexibility performance and 
functional brain activity in patients with schizophrenia.
METHODS: This was a within-subject, randomised, double-blind, 
placebo-controlled, three-period crossover study using a version of the 
Intradimensional/Extradimensional (ID/ED) task, optimised for functional 
magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), in 10 patients with schizophrenia who were 
scanned after receiving placebo, 100 µg or 250 µg roflumilast for 8 consecutive 
days. Data from an additional fMRI ID/ED study of 18 healthy participants on 
placebo was included to contextualise the schizophrenia-related performance and 
activations. The fMRI analyses included a priori driven region of interest (ROI) 
analysis of the dorsal frontoparietal attention network.
RESULTS: Patients on placebo demonstrated broad deficits in task performance 
compared to the healthy comparison group, accompanied by preserved network 
activity for solution search, but reduced activity in left ventrolateral 
prefrontal cortex (VLPFC) and posterior parietal cortex for attentional 
set-shifting and reduced activity in left dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC) 
for reversal learning. These ROI deficits were ameliorated by 250 µg 
roflumilast, whereas during solution search 100 µg roflumilast reduced activity 
in the left orbitofrontal cortex, right DLPFC and bilateral PPC, which was 
associated with an improvement in formation of attentional sets.
CONCLUSIONS: The results suggest roflumilast has dose-dependent cognitive 
enhancing effects on the ID/ED task in patients with schizophrenia, and provides 
sufficient support for larger studies to test roflumilast's role in improving 
cognitive flexibility deficits in this clinical population.

DOI: 10.1177/02698811211000778
PMCID: PMC8435828
PMID: 33908296 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of conflicting interests: The 
author(s) declared the following potential conflicts of interest with respect to 
the research, authorship and/or publication of this article: SSS has received 
grant funding for clinical trials and/or honoraria for educational input from 
EnVivo Pharmaceuticals, Takeda, AbbVie and Janssen Pharmaceuticals. He is 
supported by a European Research Council Consolidator Award (Grant Number 
311686) and the NIHR Mental Health Biomedical Research Centre at SLAM NHS 
Foundation Trust and King’s College London. MAM has acted as a consultant for 
Cambridge Cognition, Lundbeck and FORUM pharmaceuticals in the past 5 years. He 
also has or has held research funding from Shire, Roche, Lundbeck and Takeda 
Pharmaceuticals in the past 5 years. JG has acted as consultant for Quintiles 
CRO Ltd and Takeda Pharmaceuticals. NRL, PCTH, RY and LV have no disclosures or 
conflicts of interest to report.


412. Neurocase. 2006 Feb;12(1):71-9. doi: 10.1080/13554790500507032.

Functional MRI of task switching in children with Specific Language Impairment 
(SLI).

Dibbets P(1), Bakker K, Jolles J.

Author information:
(1)Psychiatry & Neuropsychology, University of Maastricht, 6200 MD, Maastricht, 
The Netherlands. P.Dibbets@np.unimaas.nl

The objective of this study was to examine executive functioning in children 
with Specific Language Impairment (SLI) using functional MRI. Six children with 
SLI and seven control children participated in this study and received a 
task-switching paradigm. No specific deficit in executive control was observed 
at the behavioral level in children with SLI. However, the neuroimaging data did 
show remarkable differences between the SLI and control children. The children 
with SLI recruited frontal and cingulate areas, normally associated with 
executive control, even when the task did not require them in the children 
without SLI. This might indicate that the task was more demanding for the SLI 
group and that compensatory mechanisms were engaged for successful task 
performance.

DOI: 10.1080/13554790500507032
PMID: 16517517 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


413. Eur J Neurosci. 2018 Mar;47(6):729-735. doi: 10.1111/ejn.13752. Epub 2017 Nov 
14.

Lobular patterns of cerebellar resting-state connectivity in adults with Autism 
Spectrum Disorder.

Olivito G(1)(2), Lupo M(1), Laghi F(3), Clausi S(1)(4), Baiocco R(3), Cercignani 
M(2)(5), Bozzali M(2)(5), Leggio M(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Ataxia Laboratory, IRCCS Santa Lucia Foundation, Via Ardeatina 306, 00179, 
Rome, Italy.
(2)Neuroimaging Laboratory, IRCCS Santa Lucia Foundation, Rome, Italy.
(3)Department of Developmental and Social Psychology, Faculty of Medicine and 
Psychology, "Sapienza" University of Rome, Rome, Italy.
(4)Department of Psychology, Faculty of Medicine and Psychology, "Sapienza" 
University of Rome, Rome, Italy.
(5)Clinical Imaging Sciences Centre, Brighton and Sussex Medical School, 
University of Sussex, Brighton, UK.

Autism spectrum disorder is a neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by core 
deficits in social functioning. Core autistics traits refer to poor social and 
imagination skills, poor attention-switching/strong focus of attention, 
exceptional attention to detail, as expressed by the autism-spectrum quotient. 
Over the years, the importance of the cerebellum in the aetiology of autism 
spectrum disorder has been acknowledged. Neuroimaging studies have provided a 
strong support to this view, showing both structural and functional connectivity 
alterations to affect the cerebellum in autism spectrum disorder. According to 
the underconnectivity theory, disrupted connectivity within cerebello-cerebral 
networks has been specifically implicated in the aetiology of autism spectrum 
disorder. However, inconsistent results have been generated across studies. In 
this study, an integrated approach has been used in a selected population of 
adults with autism spectrum disorder to analyse both cerebellar morphometry and 
functional connectivity. In individuals with autism spectrum disorder, a 
decreased cerebellar grey matter volume affected the right Crus II, a region 
showing extensive connections with cerebral areas related to social functions. 
This grey matter reduction correlates with the degree of autistic traits as 
measured by autism-spectrum quotient. Interestingly, altered functional 
connectivity was found between the reduced cerebellar Crus II and contralateral 
cerebral regions, such as frontal and temporal areas. Overall, the present data 
suggest that adults with autism spectrum disorder present with specific 
cerebellar structural alterations that may affect functional connectivity within 
cerebello-cerebral modules relevant to social processing and account for core 
autistics traits.

© 2017 Federation of European Neuroscience Societies and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/ejn.13752
PMID: 29057532 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


414. J Neurosci. 2013 Oct 23;33(43):16961-70. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1208-13.2013.

Affective modulation of cognitive control is determined by 
performance-contingency and mediated by ventromedial prefrontal and cingulate 
cortex.

Braem S(1), King JA, Korb FM, Krebs RM, Notebaert W, Egner T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental Psychology, Ghent University, Ghent, 9000, 
Belgium, and Center for Cognitive Neuroscience, Duke University, Durham, North 
Carolina 27708.

Cognitive control requires a fine balance between stability, the protection of 
an on-going task-set, and flexibility, the ability to update a task-set in line 
with changing contingencies. It is thought that emotional processing modulates 
this balance, but results have been equivocal regarding the direction of this 
modulation. Here, we tested the hypothesis that a crucial determinant of this 
modulation is whether affective stimuli represent performance-contingent or 
task-irrelevant signals. Combining functional magnetic resonance imaging with a 
conflict task-switching paradigm, we contrasted the effects of presenting 
negative- and positive-valence pictures on the stability/flexibility trade-off 
in humans, depending on whether picture presentation was contingent on 
behavioral performance. Both the behavioral and neural expressions of cognitive 
control were modulated by stimulus valence and performance contingency: in the 
performance-contingent condition, cognitive flexibility was enhanced following 
positive pictures, whereas in the nonperformance-contingent condition, positive 
stimuli promoted cognitive stability. The imaging data showed that, as 
anticipated, the stability/flexibility trade-off per se was reflected in 
differential recruitment of dorsolateral frontoparietal and striatal regions. In 
contrast, the affective modulation of stability/flexibility shifts was mirrored, 
unexpectedly, by neural responses in ventromedial prefrontal and posterior 
cingulate cortices, core nodes of the "default mode" network. Our results 
demonstrate that the affective modulation of cognitive control depends on the 
performance contingency of the affect-inducing stimuli, and they document medial 
default mode regions to mediate the flexibility-promoting effects of 
performance-contingent positive affect, thus extending recent work that recasts 
these regions as serving a key role in on-task control processes.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1208-13.2013
PMCID: PMC3807025
PMID: 24155301 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


415. Brain Topogr. 2018 May;31(3):407-418. doi: 10.1007/s10548-017-0607-6. Epub 2017 
Nov 9.

Fast Neural Dynamics of Proactive Cognitive Control in a Task-Switching Analogue 
of the Wisconsin Card Sorting Test.

Gema Díaz-Blancat(1), Juan García-Prieto(1)(2), Fernando Maestú(1)(3), Francisco 
Barceló(4).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Cognitive and Computational Neuroscience (UCM-UPM), Centre for 
Biomedical Technology, Universidad Politécnica de Madrid, Madrid, Spain.
(2)Laboratory of Electrical Engineering and Bioengineering, Department of 
Industrial Engineering, Universidad de La Laguna, Tenerife, Spain.
(3)Department of Basic Psychology II, Complutense University of Madrid, Madrid, 
Spain.
(4)Laboratory of Neuropsychology, University of the Balearic Islands, 07122, 
Palma de Mallorca, Spain. f.barcelo@uib.es.

One common assumption has been that prefrontal executive control is mostly 
required for target detection (Posner and Petersen in Ann Rev Neurosci 13:25-42, 
1990). Alternatively, cognitive control has also been related to anticipatory 
updating of task-set (contextual) information, a view that highlights proactive 
control processes. Frontoparietal cortical networks contribute to both proactive 
control and reactive target detection, although their fast dynamics are still 
largely unexplored. To examine this, we analyzed rapid magnetoencephalographic 
(MEG) source activations elicited by task cues and target cards in a task-cueing 
analogue of the Wisconsin Card Sorting Test. A single-task (color sorting) 
condition with equivalent perceptual and motor demands was used as a control. 
Our results revealed fast, transient and largely switch-specific MEG activations 
across frontoparietal and cingulo-opercular regions in anticipation of target 
cards, including (1) early (100-200 ms) cue-locked MEG signals at visual, 
temporo-parietal and prefrontal cortices of the right hemisphere (i.e., 
calcarine sulcus, precuneus, inferior frontal gyrus, anterior insula and 
supramarginal gyrus); and (2) later cue-locked MEG signals at the right anterior 
and posterior insula (200-300 ms) and the left temporo-parietal junction 
(300-500 ms). In all cases larger MEG signal intensity was observed in switch 
relative to repeat cueing conditions. Finally, behavioral restart costs and test 
scores of working memory capacity (forward digit span) correlated with 
cue-locked MEG activations at key nodes of the frontoparietal network. Together, 
our findings suggest that proactive cognitive control of task rule updating can 
be fast and transiently implemented within less than a second and in 
anticipation of target detection.

DOI: 10.1007/s10548-017-0607-6
PMID: 29124546 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


416. Neuroimage. 2016 Jul 1;134:466-474. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2016.04.055. Epub 
2016 Apr 26.

A dual but asymmetric role of the dorsal anterior cingulate cortex in response 
inhibition and switching from a non-salient to salient action.

Manza P(1), Hu S(2), Chao HH(3), Zhang S(2), Leung HC(4), Li CR(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Yale University, New Haven, CT 06519, United 
States; Department of Psychology, Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, NY 11790, 
United States.
(2)Department of Psychiatry, Yale University, New Haven, CT 06519, United 
States.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine, Yale University, New Haven, CT 06519; 
Medical Service, VA Connecticut Health Care System, West Haven, CT 06516, United 
States.
(4)Department of Psychology, Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, NY 11790, 
United States.
(5)Department of Psychiatry, Yale University, New Haven, CT 06519, United 
States; Department of Neuroscience, Yale University, New Haven, CT 06520, United 
States; Interdepartmental Neuroscience Program, Yale University, New Haven, CT 
06520, United States. Electronic address: chiang-shan.li@yale.edu.

Response inhibition and salience detection are among the most studied 
psychological constructs of cognitive control. Despite a growing body of work, 
how inhibition and salience processing interact and engage regional brain 
activations remains unclear. Here, we examined this issue in a stop signal task 
(SST), where a prepotent response needs to be inhibited to allow an alternative, 
less dominant response. Sixteen adult individuals performed two versions of the 
SST each with 25% (SST25) and 75% (SST75) of stop trials. We posited that 
greater regional activations to the infrequent trial type in each condition 
(i.e., to stop as compared to go trials in SST25 and to go as compared to stop 
trials in SST75) support salience detection. Further, successful inhibition in 
stop trials requires attention to the stop signal to trigger motor inhibition, 
and the stop signal reaction time (SSRT) has been used to index the efficiency 
of motor response inhibition. Therefore, greater regional activations to stop as 
compared to go success trials in association with the stop signal reaction time 
(SSRT) serve to expedite response inhibition. In support of an interactive role, 
the dorsal anterior cingulate cortex (dACC) increases activation to salience 
detection in both SST25 and SST75, but only mediates response inhibition in 
SST75. Thus, infrequency response in the dACC supports motor inhibition only 
when stopping has become a routine. In contrast, although the evidence is less 
robust, the pre-supplementary motor area (pre-SMA) increases activity to the 
infrequent stimulus and supports inhibition in both SST25 and SST75. These 
findings clarify a unique role of the dACC and add to the literature that 
distinguishes dACC and pre-SMA functions in cognitive control.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2016.04.055
PMCID: PMC4912860
PMID: 27126003 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


417. Hum Brain Mapp. 2018 Dec;39(12):5039-5049. doi: 10.1002/hbm.24343. Epub 2018 Sep 
21.

Education, and the balance between dynamic and stationary functional 
connectivity jointly support executive functions in relapsing-remitting multiple 
sclerosis.

Lin SJ(1)(2), Vavasour I(3), Kosaka B(4), Li DKB(3)(5), Traboulsee A(5), MacKay 
A(3)(6), McKeown MJ(1)(2)(5).

Author information:
(1)Graduate Program in Neuroscience, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, 
British Columbia, Canada.
(2)Pacific Parkinson's Research Centre, University of British Columbia Hospital, 
Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.
(3)Department of Radiology, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British 
Columbia, Canada.
(4)Department of Psychiatry, University of British Columbia Hospital, Vancouver, 
British Columbia, Canada.
(5)Faculty of Medicine, Neurology, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, 
British Columbia, Canada.
(6)Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of British Columbia, 
Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.

Graphical network characteristics and nonstationary functional connectivity 
features, both derived from resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging 
(rsfMRI) data, have been associated with cognitive performance in healthy 
subjects. How these features jointly relate to cognition in diseased states has 
not been investigated. In this study, 46 relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis 
subjects underwent rsfMRI scans and a focused cognitive battery. With a sliding 
window approach, we examined six dynamic network features that indicated how 
connectivity changed over time as well as six measures derived from graph theory 
to reflect static network characteristics. Multiset canonical correlation 
analysis (MCCA) was then carried out to investigate the relations between 
dynamic network features, stationary network characteristics, cognitive testing, 
demographic, disease severity, and mood. Multiple sclerosis (MS) subjects 
demonstrated weaker connectivity strength, decreased network density, reduced 
global changes, but increased changes in interhemispheric connectivity compared 
to controls. The MCCA model determined that executive functions and processing 
speed ability measured by Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale IV (WAIS-IV) Working 
Memory Index, WAIS-IV Processing Speed Index, and the Verbal Fluency Test were 
positively correlated with education, dynamic connectivity, and static 
connectivity strength; while poor task switching was correlated with disease 
severity, psychiatric comorbidities such as depression, anxiety, and fatigue, 
and static network density. Taken together, our results suggest that better 
executive functioning in MS requires maintenance of a continued coordination 
between stationary and dynamic functional connectivity as well as the support of 
education, and dynamic functional connectivity may provide an additional 
cognitive biomarker of disease severity in the MS population.

© 2018 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/hbm.24343
PMCID: PMC6866468
PMID: 30240533 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: S.‐J.L., I.V., B.K., M.M., and A.M. do not have 
conflict of interest to declare.


418. Soc Cogn Affect Neurosci. 2019 Mar 5;14(3):305-317. doi: 10.1093/scan/nsz006.

Differential modulation of cognitive control networks by monetary reward and 
punishment.

Cubillo A(1), Makwana AB(1), Hare TA(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Economics, University of Zurich, Zürich, Switzerland.

Incentives are primary determinants of if and how well an organism will perform 
a given behavior. Here, we examined how incentive valence and magnitude 
influence task switching, a critical cognitive control process, and test the 
predictions that the anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) and the ventral striatum 
(vStr) function as key nodes linking motivation and control systems in the 
brain. Our results indicate that reward and punishment incentives have both 
common and distinct effects on cognitive control at the behavioral and 
neurobiological levels. For example, reward incentives led to greater activity 
in the ACC during the engagement of control relative to punishments. 
Furthermore, the neural responses to reward and punishment differed as a 
function of individual sensitivity to each incentive valence. Functional 
connectivity analyses suggest a role for vStr in signaling motivational value 
during cognitive control and as a potential link between motivation and control 
networks. Overall, our findings suggest that similar changes in observed 
behavior (e.g. response accuracy) under reward and punishment incentives are 
mediated by, at least partially, distinct neurobiological substrates.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press.

DOI: 10.1093/scan/nsz006
PMCID: PMC6399610
PMID: 30690563 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


419. Cogn Affect Behav Neurosci. 2012 Dec;12(4):629-43. doi: 
10.3758/s13415-012-0105-y.

When the rules are reversed: action-monitoring consequences of reversing 
stimulus-response mappings.

Schroder HS(1), Moran TP, Moser JS, Altmann EM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Michigan State University, East Lansing, 48824, 
USA.

How does switching tasks affect our ability to monitor and adapt our behavior? 
Largely independent lines of research have examined how individuals monitor 
their actions and adjust to errors, on the one hand, and how they are able to 
switch between two or more tasks, on the other. Few studies, however, have 
explored how these two aspects of cognitive-behavioral flexibility interact. 
That is, how individuals monitor their actions when task rules are switched 
remains unknown. The present study sought to address this question by examining 
the action-monitoring consequences of response switching-a form of task 
switching that involves switching the response that is associated with a 
particular stimulus. We recorded event-related brain potentials (ERPs) while 
participants performed a modified letter flanker task in which the 
stimulus-response (S-R) mappings were reversed between blocks. Specifically, we 
examined three ERPs-the N2, the error-related negativity (ERN), and the error 
positivity (Pe)-that have been closely associated with action monitoring. The 
findings revealed that S-R reversal blocks were associated with dynamic 
alterations of action-monitoring brain activity: the N2 and ERN were enhanced, 
whereas the Pe was reduced. Moreover, participants were less likely to adapt 
their posterror behavior in S-R reversal blocks. Taken together, these data 
suggest that response switching results in early enhancements of effortful 
control mechanisms (N2 and ERN) at the expense of reductions in later response 
evaluation processes (Pe). Thus, when rules change, our attempts at control are 
accompanied by less attention to our actions.

DOI: 10.3758/s13415-012-0105-y
PMID: 22797946 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


420. Hum Brain Mapp. 2005 May;25(1):22-34. doi: 10.1002/hbm.20127.

Involvement of the inferior frontal junction in cognitive control: meta-analyses 
of switching and Stroop studies.

Derrfuss J(1), Brass M, Neumann J, von Cramon DY.

Author information:
(1)Max Planck Institute for Human Cognitive and Brain Sciences, Leipzig, 
Germany. j.derrfuss@fz-juelich.de

There is growing evidence that a specific region in the posterior frontolateral 
cortex is involved intimately in cognitive control processes. This region, 
located in the vicinity of the junction of the inferior frontal sulcus and the 
inferior precentral sulcus, was termed the inferior frontal junction (IFJ). The 
IFJ was shown to be involved in the updating of task representations and to be 
activated commonly in a within-subject investigation of a task-switching 
paradigm, the Stroop task, and a verbal n-back task. Here, we investigate the 
involvement of the IFJ in cognitive control by employing a meta-analytic 
approach. Two quantitative meta-analyses of functional magnetic resonance 
imaging (fMRI) studies were conducted. One meta-analysis included frontal 
activations from task-switching, set-shifting, and stimulus-response (S-R) 
reversal studies, the other included frontal activations from color-word Stroop 
studies. Results showed highly significant clustering of activations in the IFJ 
in both analyses. These results provide strong evidence for the consistent 
involvement of the IFJ in both switching and Stroop paradigms. Furthermore, they 
support our concept of areal specialization in the frontolateral cortex, which 
posits that it is not only the middorsolateral part that plays an important role 
in cognitive control, but also the IFJ. Finally, our results demonstrate how 
quantitative meta-analyses can be used to test hypotheses about the involvement 
of specific brain regions in cognitive control.

DOI: 10.1002/hbm.20127
PMCID: PMC6871679
PMID: 15846824 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


421. Brain Res. 2019 Nov 1;1722:146365. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2019.146365. Epub 
2019 Aug 7.

Involvement of human left frontoparietal cortices in neural processes associated 
with task-switching between two sequences of skilled finger movements.

Uehara S(1), Mizuguchi N(2), Hirose S(2), Yamamoto S(3), Naito E(4).

Author information:
(1)Center for Information and Neural Networks, National Institute of Information 
and Communications Technology, Osaka 565-0871, Japan; The Japan Society for the 
Promotion of Science, Tokyo 102-0083, Japan.
(2)Center for Information and Neural Networks, National Institute of Information 
and Communications Technology, Osaka 565-0871, Japan; Graduate School of 
Medicine and Graduate School of Frontier Biosciences, Osaka University, Osaka 
565-0871, Japan.
(3)School of Health and Sport Sciences, Osaka University of Health and Sport 
Sciences, Osaka 590-0496, Japan.
(4)Center for Information and Neural Networks, National Institute of Information 
and Communications Technology, Osaka 565-0871, Japan; Graduate School of 
Medicine and Graduate School of Frontier Biosciences, Osaka University, Osaka 
565-0871, Japan. Electronic address: eiichi.naito@nict.go.jp.

In this study, we demonstrate the involvement of left frontoparietal cortices in 
neural processes for task-switching between skilled movements. Functional 
magnetic resonance imaging was conducted while thirty-two right-handed healthy 
participants performed two sequential finger-movement tasks with their left 
hands. One group (n = 16) trained these tasks through random-practice (tasks 
were either switched or repeated trial by trial) on one day and blocked-practice 
(successive intensive practice of each task) on the next day, while the 
remaining participants practiced in the reverse order. On the first day, 
performance of both tasks improved in all participants, suggesting that the two 
skilful tasks can be learned in both practice schedules. However, during the 
random-practice, the performance in the switched trials initially deteriorated 
and gradually approached to that in the repeated trials as the practice 
proceeded. The left (mainly inferior) frontoparietal cortices showed greater 
preparatory activity for the switched trials compared with the repeated trials 
in a left-hemispheric dominant manner, and the left intraparietal activity 
decreased as the performance of the switched trials improved. The results 
indicate that neural processes for task-switching are associated with the 
greater preparatory activity in the left inferior frontoparietal cortices, and 
the efficient switching may proceed concomitantly with the left intraparietal 
activity reduction.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.brainres.2019.146365
PMID: 31400310 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


422. J Cogn Neurosci. 2011 Nov;23(11):3529-39. doi: 10.1162/jocn_a_00062. Epub 2011 
May 13.

Functional connectivity separates switching operations in the posterior lateral 
frontal cortex.

Stelzel C(1), Basten U, Fiebach CJ.

Author information:
(1)University of Heidelberg, Germany. christine.stelzel@charite.de

Task representations consist of different aspects such as the representations of 
the relevant stimuli, the abstract rules to be applied, and the actions to be 
performed. To be flexible in our daily lives, we frequently need to switch 
between some or all aspects of a task. In the present study, we examined whether 
switching between abstract task rules and switching between response hands is 
associated with overlapping regions in the posterior lateral frontal cortex and 
whether switching between these two aspects of a task representation is neurally 
implemented by distinct functional brain networks. Subjects performed a 
cue-based task-switching paradigm where the location of the task cue 
additionally specified the response hand to be used. Overlapping activity for 
switching between abstract rules versus response hands was present in the 
inferior frontal junction area of the posterolateral frontal cortex. This 
region, however, showed very distinct patterns of functional connectivity 
depending on the content of the switch: Increased functional connectivity with 
anterior prefrontal, superior frontal, and hippocampal regions was present for 
abstract rule switching, whereas response hand switching led to increased 
coupling with motor regions surrounding the central sulcus. These results reveal 
that a rather general involvement of the posterior lateral frontal cortex in 
different switching contexts can be further characterized by highly specific 
functional interactions with other task-relevant regions, depending on the 
content of the switch.

DOI: 10.1162/jocn_a_00062
PMID: 21568635 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


423. J Cogn Neurosci. 2009 Jul;21(7):1380-95. doi: 10.1162/jocn.2009.21093.

Does white matter matter? Spatio-temporal dynamics of task switching in aging.

Gratton G(1), Wee E, Rykhlevskaia EI, Leaver EE, Fabiani M.

Author information:
(1)University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL 61801, USA.

Older adults often encounter difficulties in switching between tasks, perhaps 
because of age-related decreases in executive function. Executive function may 
largely depend on connections between brain areas-connections that may become 
structurally and functionally weaker in aging. Here we investigated functional 
and structural age-related changes in switching between a spatial and a verbal 
task. These tasks were chosen because they are expected to differentially use 
the two hemispheres. Brain measures included anatomical information about 
anterior corpus callosum size (CC; the major commissure linking the left and 
right hemisphere), and the event-related optical signal (EROS). Behavioral 
results indicated that older adults had greater task-switching difficulties, 
which, however, were largely restricted to switching to the spatial task and to 
individuals with smaller anterior CCs. The EROS data showed both general 
switching-related activity in the left middle frontal gyrus (with approximately 
300-msec latency) and task-specific activity in the inferior frontal gyrus, 
lateralized to the left for the switch-to-verbal condition and to the right for 
the switch-to-spatial condition. This lateralization was most evident in younger 
adults. In older adults, activity in the switch-to-spatial condition was 
lateralized to the right hemisphere in individuals with large CC, and to the 
left in individuals with small CC. These data suggest that (a) task switching 
may involve both task-general and task-specific processes; and (b) white matter 
changes may underlie some of the age-related problems in switching. These 
effects are discussed in terms of the hypothesis that aging involves some degree 
of cortical disconnection, both functional and anatomical.

DOI: 10.1162/jocn.2009.21093
PMCID: PMC2917701
PMID: 18752402 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


424. Nan Fang Yi Ke Da Xue Xue Bao. 2017 Jun 20;37(6):755-760. doi: 
10.3969/j.issn.1673-4254.2017.06.07.

[Neural dynamics of cognitive flexibility: spatiotemporal analysis of 
event-related potentials].

[Article in Chinese]

Cao Y(1), Zhou S, Wang Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Nanfang Hospital, Department of Psychology, Southern 
Medical University, Guangzhou 510515, China. E-mail: lona02@163.com.

OBJECTIVE: To explore the neural dynamics during alternating task switching.
METHODS: In an alternating-runs paradigm, 23 healthy volunteers were asked to 
categorize Arabic numerals displayed on the screen into either even or odd 
numbers or judge if the number was greater than 5 according its color cues. The 
color of the numerals were regularly switched every three trials (switch, nested 
and pre-switch trials). ANOVA of repeated-measure and paired t-test were used 
for analysis of the behavioral performance and event-related potential (ERP) 
data of 19 channels, and statistical parametric mapping of F and t values was 
used to reveal the spatiotemporal patterns of ERP.
RESULTS: Significant switch costs (switch versus nested trial) were found in the 
mean reaction time (123.61∓83.84 ms, P<0.05) and the mean accuracy 
[(1.24∓3.30)%, P<0.05]. Statistical parametric mapping of t value of ERP 
suggested that the switch effects appeared in the right frontal-parietal network 
and then in the left one. The preparation effects appeared in the right frontal 
pole followed by the left one, both accompanied by the activation of the 
posterior regions.
CONCLUSIONS: Cognitive flexibility depends on the dynamic activation of the 
fronto-parietal network. The frontal poles are involved in the pre-switch 
preparatory process, the dorsal frontal areas are related with the actual switch 
process, and the left and right frontal regions play different roles.

目的: 探索认知灵活性相关脑网络的动态演化。
方法: 
采用交替切换任务范式，23名被试完成数字大小和奇偶判断任务，每3个试次数字颜色改变，提示任务规则切换，3个试次分别对应切换、基线和准备条件。分析3种条件下的行为绩效和19通道事件相关电位统计参数映像的时空模式。
结果: 切换代价（切换-基线）显著：反应时123.61±83.84 
ms；正确率（1.24±3.30）%。事件相关电位统计参数映像（t）显示：切换效应先后出现在额顶网络的右侧和左侧部分，准备效应主要表现为反应前右侧额极和反应后左侧额极的激活。
结论: 认知灵活性主要依赖于额顶网络的动态激活，而前额极参与任务切换前的跨试次准备过程；背侧额区参与试次内的即时任务切换，且左右两侧额区功能不同。

DOI: 10.3969/j.issn.1673-4254.2017.06.07
PMCID: PMC6744156
PMID: 28669948 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


425. Neuroimage. 2016 May 15;132:499-511. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2016.03.010. Epub 
2016 Mar 11.

Contextually sensitive power changes across multiple frequency bands underpin 
cognitive control.

Cooper PS(1), Darriba Á(2), Karayanidis F(1), Barceló F(3).

Author information:
(1)Functional Neuroimaging Laboratory, School of Psychology, University of 
Newcastle, Australia; Priority Research Centre for Translational Neuroscience 
and Mental Health, University of Newcastle, Australia.
(2)Laboratory of Neuropsychology, University of the Balearic Islands, Mallorca, 
Spain.
(3)Laboratory of Neuropsychology, University of the Balearic Islands, Mallorca, 
Spain; Asociación de Neuropsicología Balear (ANEBA), Mallorca, Spain. Electronic 
address: f.barcelo@uib.es.

Flexible control of cognition bestows a remarkable adaptability to a broad range 
of contexts. While cognitive control is known to rely on frontoparietal neural 
architecture to achieve this flexibility, the neural mechanisms that allow such 
adaptability to context are poorly understood. In the current study, we 
quantified contextual demands on the cognitive control system via a priori 
estimation of information across three tasks varying in difficulty (oddball, 
go/nogo, and switch tasks) and compared neural responses across these different 
contexts. We report evidence of the involvement of multiple frequency bands 
during preparation and implementation of cognitive control. Specifically, a 
common frontoparietal delta and a central alpha process corresponded to rule 
implementation and motor response respectively. Interestingly, we found evidence 
of a frontal theta signature that was sensitive to increasing amounts of 
information and a posterior parietal alpha process only seen during anticipatory 
rule updating. Importantly, these neural signatures of context processing match 
proposed frontal hierarchies of control and together provide novel evidence of a 
complex interplay of multiple frequency bands underpinning flexible, 
contextually sensitive cognition.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2016.03.010
PMID: 26975557 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


426. Arch Gerontol Geriatr. 2013 Jan-Feb;56(1):109-17. doi: 
10.1016/j.archger.2012.10.004. Epub 2012 Nov 6.

Correlation between moderate daily physical activity and neurocognitive 
variability in healthy elderly people.

Kimura K(1), Yasunaga A, Wang LQ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Humanities and Social Sciences, School of Science and 
Technology for Future Life, Tokyo Denki University, 5 Senju-Asahi-cho, 
Adachi-ku, Tokyo 120-8551, Japan. kimura@cck.dendai.ac.jp

Recent studies have reported that moderate physical activity in daily life 
contributes to maintenance of a proper state of cognitive function in elderly 
individuals. The present study investigated the validity of correlations between 
moderate physical activity and cognitive function using more objective and 
detailed assessments of both physical activity and neurocognitive function. 
Participants comprised 72 healthy elderly individuals who wore an electronic 
accelerometer during waking hours for 3 months. This device recorded the number 
of steps per day as well as the duration of each intensity level in daily life; 
levels 1-3 were the equivalent of easy-paced walking (light activity), while 
levels 4-6 corresponded to brisk walking (moderate activity). To estimate 
executive cognitive ability in healthy elderly individuals, performance 
variability of executive control was examined with a task-switching reaction 
time (RT) test measuring intra-individual variability (IIV) in RTs. In 43 
consenting participants, functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) during the 
task-switching RT trial was analyzed to assess differences in brain activity 
patterns as a function of daily physical activity. Daily duration of level 4 
physical activity correlated negatively with and significantly predicted IIV. 
Moreover, fMRI analysis confirmed that the higher physical activity group 
(duration of level 4 activity ≥ 26.4 min/day) showed significantly reduced 
age-related functional attenuation of prefrontal activations during the 
task-switching RT trial. The study discusses the possibility that enhancing the 
moderate daily physical activity could be helpful for lowering the rate of 
neurocognitive degradations in healthy elderly individuals.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.archger.2012.10.004
PMID: 23137935 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


427. Psychiatry Res. 2013 Jul 30;213(1):31-8. doi: 10.1016/j.pscychresns.2012.12.006. 
Epub 2013 May 18.

Switch the itch: a naturalistic follow-up study on the neural correlates of 
cognitive flexibility in obsessive-compulsive disorder.

Vriend C(1), de Wit SJ, Remijnse PL, van Balkom AJ, Veltman DJ, van den Heuvel 
OA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The 
Netherlands. c.vriend@vumc.nl

Obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) is a relatively common psychiatric disorder 
characterized by intrusive thoughts and behaviors that dominate daily living, 
like an itch patients cannot ignore. Deficits in executive functioning are 
common in OCD and are thought to be related to dysfunctional frontal-striatal 
systems. One of those executive functions is cognitive flexibility, defined as 
the ability to rapidly switch response strategies following changes in 
task-relevant information. The temporal stability of cognitive flexibility 
impairments in OCD has been incompletely investigated since previous studies 
have suggested both state and trait dependency. In this study, 16 OCD patients 
performed a functional magnetic resonance imaging version of a task-switching 
paradigm twice, intervened by a follow-up period of on average 6 months. Results 
show that functional abnormalities in the dorsal frontal-striatal circuit and 
anterior cingulate cortex at baseline normalized at follow-up. This change in 
the recruitment of task-related brain circuits correlated with change in disease 
severity. These results support the view that the imbalance between the dorsal 
and ventral frontal-striatal circuits is at least partly state-dependent, and is 
associated with a reduction in symptom severity.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pscychresns.2012.12.006
PMID: 23693090 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


428. Front Hum Neurosci. 2018 Dec 10;12:493. doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2018.00493. 
eCollection 2018.

Neural Correlates of Non-clinical Internet Use in the Motivation Network and Its 
Modulation by Subclinical Autistic Traits.

Fujiwara H(1)(2)(3), Yoshimura S(4), Kobayashi K(2), Ueno T(2), Oishi N(5), 
Murai T(2).

Author information:
(1)Integrated Clinical Education Center, Kyoto University Hospital, Kyoto, 
Japan.
(2)Department of Neuropsychiatry, Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto University, 
Kyoto, Japan.
(3)Artificial Intelligence Ethics and Society Team, RIKEN Center for Advanced 
Intelligence Project, Tokyo, Japan.
(4)Department of Neurodevelopmental Psychiatry, Habilitation and Rehabilitation, 
Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan.
(5)Medical Innovation Center, Kyoto University Graduate School of Medicine, 
Kyoto, Japan.

Background: Increasing evidence regarding the neural correlates of excessive or 
pathological internet use (IU) has accumulated in recent years, and comorbidity 
with depression and autism has been reported in multiple studies. However, 
psychological and neural correlates of non-clinical IU in healthy individuals 
remain unclear. Objectives: The aim of the current study was to investigate the 
relationships between non-clinical IU and functional connectivity (FC), focusing 
on the brain's motivation network. We sought to clarify the influence of 
depression and autistic traits on these relationships in healthy individuals. 
Methods: Resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) was 
performed in 119 healthy volunteers. IU, depression, and autistic traits were 
assessed using the Generalized Problematic Internet Use Scale 2 (GPIUS2), Beck 
Depression Inventory-II (BDI-II), and the autism spectrum quotient (AQ) scale, 
respectively. Correlational analyses were performed using CONN-software within 
the motivation-related network, which consisted of 22 brain regions defined by a 
previous response-conflict task-based fMRI study with a reward cue. We also 
performed mediation analyses via the bootstrap method. Results: Total GPIUS2 
scores were positively correlated with FC between the (a) left middle frontal 
gyrus (MFG) and bilateral medial prefrontal cortex; (b) left MFG and right 
supplementary motor area (SMA); (c) left MFG and right anterior insula, and (d) 
right MFG and right insula. The "Mood Regulation" subscale of the GPIUS2 was 
positively correlated with FC between left MFG and right SMA. The "Deficient 
Self-Regulation" subscale was positively correlated with FC between right MFG 
and right anterior insula (statistical thresholds, FDR < 0.05). Among these 
significant correlations, those between GPIUS2 (total and "Mood Regulation" 
subscale) scores and FC became stronger after controlling for AQ scores (total 
and "Attention Switching" subscale), indicating significant mediation by AQ (95% 
CI < 0.05). In contrast, BDI-II had no mediating effect. Conclusion: Positive 
correlations between IU and FC in the motivation network may indicate 
health-promoting effects of non-clinical IU. However, this favorable association 
is attenuated in individuals with subclinical autistic traits, suggesting the 
importance of a personalized educational approach for these individuals in terms 
of adequate IU.

DOI: 10.3389/fnhum.2018.00493
PMCID: PMC6295452
PMID: 30618678


429. Arch Clin Neuropsychol. 2012 Aug;27(5):495-509. doi: 10.1093/arclin/acs058. Epub 
2012 Jun 28.

Magnetic resonance imaging predictors of executive functioning in patients with 
pediatric-onset multiple sclerosis.

Till C(1), Ho C, Dudani A, García-Lorenzo D, Collins DL, Banwell BL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, York University, Toronto, Canada. ctill@yorku.ca

Executive functions (EFs) are vulnerable to disruption in pediatric-onset 
multiple sclerosis (MS) patients. We describe the pattern and correlates of 
executive dysfunction in 34 adolescents with MS on neuropsychological tests and 
the parent version of the Behavior Rating Inventory of Executive Function 
(BRIEF). The adolescents with MS performed lower than age-matched controls in 
several areas of executive functioning, with 44% of patients being impaired on 
the Trail Making Test-Part B. On the BRIEF, problems in working memory and 
planning/organization were identified in the patient group compared with 
controls, particularly in patients with a younger age at disease onset. Task 
performance and parent-ratings of EF skills were strongly related to whole brain 
and regional brain volume metrics and, to a lesser extent, T(2)-weighted lesion 
volume. Working memory and attention switching are at greatest risk of 
impairment. Results support the inclusion of neuropsychological assessment 
alongside parent-report measures of EF skills in childhood-onset MS.

DOI: 10.1093/arclin/acs058
PMID: 22751624 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


430. Front Hum Neurosci. 2012 Feb 20;6:24. doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2012.00024. eCollection 
2012.

Verbal to visual code switching improves working memory in older adults: an fMRI 
study.

Osaka M(1), Otsuka Y, Osaka N.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Graduate School of Human Sciences, Osaka University 
Osaka, Japan.

The effect of verbal to visual code switching training on working memory 
performance was investigated in individuals aged 63 and older. During verbal 
working memory task performance, the training group (n = 25) was introduced to a 
verbal to visual code switching strategy while the control group (n = 25) was 
not exposed to such a strategy. Working memory recognition accuracy was enhanced 
only in the training group. To explore the neural substrates underlying these 
strategy effects, fMRI was used to measure brain activity in both groups during 
working memory task performance before and after an attention training period. 
In a comparison between pre- and post-training sessions, results showed 
increased activation in the anterior cingulate cortex (ACC). Relative to the 
control group, the post-training group exhibited increased activation in the 
left and right inferior parietal lobules (IPLs) and right superior parietal 
lobule (SPL). These findings suggest that use of a verbal to visual code 
switching strategy may assist older individuals in the maintenance of 
information in working memory.

DOI: 10.3389/fnhum.2012.00024
PMCID: PMC3282475
PMID: 22363281


431. Hum Brain Mapp. 2000;9(1):26-37. doi: 
10.1002/(SICI)1097-0193(2000)9:1&#x0003c;26::AID-HBM3&#x0003e;3.0.CO;2-2.

Event-related fMRI: comparison of conditions with varying BOLD overlap.

Pollmann S(1), Dove A, Yves von Cramon D, Wiggins CJ.

Author information:
(1)Max Planck Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience, Leipzig, Germany. 
pollmann@cns.mpg.de

Recently, event-related fMRI-experiments have been reported in which subsequent 
trials were separated by only 2 sec or less. Because the BOLD response needs 10 
sec and longer to return to baseline, the event-related signal in these 
experiments has to be extracted from the overlapping responses elicited by 
successive trials. Usually it is assumed that this convolved signal is a 
summation of the overlapping BOLD responses. We tested this assumption by 
comparing event-related signals in conditions with little and with substantial 
BOLD overlap in two fMRI experiments of a task-switching paradigm. We analyzed 
the difference in the activational time course elicited by a critical task and a 
baseline task when trials of both tasks were separated by intertrial intervals 
of 15 sec or when the critical trials were embedded in a stream of baseline 
trials with ISI = 1 sec. The change of the BOLD signal elicited by the critical 
trials showed a high correspondence between both experiments in five out of six 
cortical ROI. Our data support the view that BOLD overlap leads to largely 
linear signal changes. In the present study, task-related increases in the BOLD 
response were detected equally well with substantial BOLD overlap as with mostly 
nonoverlapping BOLD responses.

DOI: 10.1002/(SICI)1097-0193(2000)9:1&#x0003c;26::AID-HBM3&#x0003e;3.0.CO;2-2
PMCID: PMC6871911
PMID: 10643727 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


432. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol. 2007 Feb;28(2):226-35.

Cognitive aging, executive function, and fractional anisotropy: a diffusion 
tensor MR imaging study.

Grieve SM(1), Williams LM, Paul RH, Clark CR, Gordon E.

Author information:
(1)The Brain Resource International Database, The Brain Resource Company, 
Ultimo, Australia. sgrieve@gmp.usyd.edu.au

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Fractional anisotropy (FA) is a useful measure of 
connectivity in the brain that can be derived from the diffusion tensor imaging 
(DTI) dataset. This study investigated the relationship between FA and selected 
measures of cognition across a broad age group to explore a possible structural 
basis for cognitive changes with age.
METHODS: FA images were generated from DTI data acquired at 1.5T in 87 healthy 
subjects (age range, 20-73 years). Relationships between a range of cognitive 
measures and FA were explored using regional and voxel-based analysis.
RESULTS: Age and regional average FA were significantly associated in the 
frontal, parietal, and temporal lobes but not in the occipital lobe. This 
negative relationship was especially prominent in the prefrontal regions of the 
frontal lobe, where FA declined at a rate of approximately 3% per decade. 
Decreased FA in the frontal, temporal, and parietal lobes was associated with 
poorer cognitive performance in executive maze and in an attention-switching 
task. A voxel-level analysis of these data revealed that the executive 
function-FA association was particularly strong and regionally delineated over 2 
continuous, bilateral areas extending from the prefrontal cortex to the parietal 
lobe, with projections to the anterior portions of the thalamus.
CONCLUSIONS: We demonstrate a relationship between FA and a measure of executive 
function-a core cognitive component that is a key feature of cognitive aging. We 
propose that that FA may provide an early means for the detection of age-related 
cognitive change and suggest a need for prospective data to explore this 
association.

PMCID: PMC7977408
PMID: 17296985 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


433. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011 Mar 8;108(10):4182-7. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.1016134108. Epub 2011 Feb 22.

Attention-driven auditory cortex short-term plasticity helps segregate relevant 
sounds from noise.

Ahveninen J(1), Hämäläinen M, Jääskeläinen IP, Ahlfors SP, Huang S, Lin FH, Raij 
T, Sams M, Vasios CE, Belliveau JW.

Author information:
(1)Harvard Medical School-Athinoula A. Martinos Center for Biomedical Imaging, 
Department of Radiology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Charlestown, MA 02129, 
USA.

How can we concentrate on relevant sounds in noisy environments? A "gain model" 
suggests that auditory attention simply amplifies relevant and suppresses 
irrelevant afferent inputs. However, it is unclear whether this suffices when 
attended and ignored features overlap to stimulate the same neuronal receptive 
fields. A "tuning model" suggests that, in addition to gain, attention modulates 
feature selectivity of auditory neurons. We recorded magnetoencephalography, 
EEG, and functional MRI (fMRI) while subjects attended to tones delivered to one 
ear and ignored opposite-ear inputs. The attended ear was switched every 30 s to 
quantify how quickly the effects evolve. To produce overlapping inputs, the 
tones were presented alone vs. during white-noise masking notch-filtered ±1/6 
octaves around the tone center frequencies. Amplitude modulation (39 vs. 41 Hz 
in opposite ears) was applied for "frequency tagging" of attention effects on 
maskers. Noise masking reduced early (50-150 ms; N1) auditory responses to 
unattended tones. In support of the tuning model, selective attention canceled 
out this attenuating effect but did not modulate the gain of 50-150 ms activity 
to nonmasked tones or steady-state responses to the maskers themselves. These 
tuning effects originated at nonprimary auditory cortices, purportedly occupied 
by neurons that, without attention, have wider frequency tuning than ±1/6 
octaves. The attentional tuning evolved rapidly, during the first few seconds 
after attention switching, and correlated with behavioral discrimination 
performance. In conclusion, a simple gain model alone cannot explain auditory 
selective attention. In nonprimary auditory cortices, attention-driven 
short-term plasticity retunes neurons to segregate relevant sounds from noise.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1016134108
PMCID: PMC3053977
PMID: 21368107 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


434. Behav Neurosci. 1996 Oct;110(5):872-86. doi: 10.1037//0735-7044.110.5.872.

Primate analogue of the Wisconsin Card Sorting Test: effects of excitotoxic 
lesions of the prefrontal cortex in the marmoset.

Dias R(1), Robbins TW, Roberts AC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental Psychology, University of Cambridge, United 
Kingdom.

Using a primate analogue of the Wisconsin Card Sort Test, this study 
demonstrated, for the first time, that lesions of the prefrontal cortex in 
monkeys produce a qualitatively similar impairment in attentional set-shifting 
to that seen following prefrontal cortical damage in humans. Although damage to 
the prefrontal cortex did not disrupt the ability of marmosets, a New World 
monkey, to maintain an attentional set, it did disrupt their ability to shift an 
attentional set. It also impaired their performance on discrimination reversal, 
object retrieval, and spatial delayed response, consistent with the effects of 
prefrontal damage in Old World monkeys. Comparison of the cognitive processes 
underlying discrimination reversal, object retrieval, and attentional 
set-shifting reveals the various types of inhibitory control provided by the 
prefrontal cortex.

DOI: 10.1037//0735-7044.110.5.872
PMID: 8918991 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


435. Brain Struct Funct. 2018 Mar;223(2):925-940. doi: 10.1007/s00429-017-1531-y. 
Epub 2017 Oct 12.

The role of phasic norepinephrine modulations during task switching: evidence 
for specific effects in parietal areas.

Wolff N(1), Mückschel M(1)(2), Ziemssen T(2), Beste C(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Cognitive Neurophysiology, Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 
Faculty of Medicine, TU Dresden, Fetscherstrasse 74, 01307, Dresden, Germany.
(2)Department of Neurology, Faculty of Medicine, MS Centre Dresden, Centre of 
Clinical Neuroscience, TU Dresden, Dresden, Germany.
(3)Cognitive Neurophysiology, Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 
Faculty of Medicine, TU Dresden, Fetscherstrasse 74, 01307, Dresden, Germany. 
christian.beste@uniklinikum-dresden.de.
(4)Experimental Neurobiology, National Institute of Mental Health, Klecany, 
Czech Republic. christian.beste@uniklinikum-dresden.de.

Cognitive flexibility is a major requirement for successful goal-directed 
behavior and their neurobiological underpinnings are becoming better understood. 
However, the role of the norepinephrine system during task switching is largely 
enigmatic, despite neurobiological considerations make it likely that the 
norepinephrine system likely plays an important role. Theoretical considerations 
also suggest that the norepinephrine system mainly modulates task-switching 
processes when these rely upon working memory mechanisms. This topic was 
examined in the current system neurophysiological study integrating 
event-related potential (ERP) with pupil diameter data as a proximate the 
norepinephrine system activity. Combined with source localization methods, human 
brain structure, brain function, and phasic modulations by an important 
neurobiological system were integrated. The results show that 
cognitive-neurophysiological subprocesses during the actual switching processes, 
reflected by the N2 and P3 ERP components, are not modulated by the 
norepinephrine system. Rather, this system modulates preparatory processes in 
the fore period of stimuli signaling possible switches of response sets. The 
source localization results show that this is achieved by modulating neural 
processes in the temporo-parietal junction (BA40). Importantly, these phasic 
modulatory effects of the norepinephrine system were only evident when working 
memory processes had to be used to guide the selection of the appropriate 
responses for task switching.

DOI: 10.1007/s00429-017-1531-y
PMID: 29026994 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


436. Curr Probl Diagn Radiol. 2017 Jul-Aug;46(4):275-281. doi: 
10.1067/j.cpradiol.2016.11.010. Epub 2016 Nov 15.

Workflow Dynamics and the Imaging Value Chain: Quantifying the Effect of 
Designating a Nonimage-Interpretive Task Workflow.

Lee MH(1), Schemmel AJ(1), Pooler BD(1), Hanley T(2), Kennedy TA(1), Field 
AS(3), Wiegmann D(2), Yu JJ(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiology, University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and 
Public Health, Madison, WI.
(2)Department of Industrial and Systems Engineering, College of Engineering, 
University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI.
(3)Department of Radiology, University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and 
Public Health, Madison, WI; Department of Biomedical Engineering, College of 
Engineering, University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI.
(4)Department of Radiology, University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and 
Public Health, Madison, WI; Department of Psychiatry, University of Wisconsin 
School of Medicine and Public Health, Madison, WI; Department of Biomedical 
Engineering, College of Engineering, University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI; 
Neuroscience Training Program, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI. 
Electronic address: jpyu@uwhealth.org.

PURPOSE: To assess the impact of separate non-image interpretive task and 
image-interpretive task workflows in an academic neuroradiology practice.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A prospective, randomized, observational investigation of 
a centralized academic neuroradiology reading room was performed. The primary 
reading room fellow was observed over a one-month period using a time-and-motion 
methodology, recording frequency and duration of tasks performed. Tasks were 
categorized into separate image interpretive and non-image interpretive 
workflows. Post-intervention observation of the primary fellow was repeated 
following the implementation of a consult assistant responsible for non-image 
interpretive tasks. Pre- and post-intervention data were compared.
RESULTS: Following separation of image-interpretive and non-image interpretive 
workflows, time spent on image-interpretive tasks by the primary fellow 
increased from 53.8% to 73.2% while non-image interpretive tasks decreased from 
20.4% to 4.4%. Mean time duration of image interpretation nearly doubled, from 
05:44 to 11:01 (p = 0.002). Decreases in specific non-image interpretive tasks, 
including phone calls/paging (2.86/hr versus 0.80/hr), in-room consultations 
(1.36/hr versus 0.80/hr), and protocoling (0.99/hr versus 0.10/hr), were 
observed. The consult assistant experienced 29.4 task switching events per hour. 
Rates of specific non-image interpretive tasks for the CA were 6.41/hr for phone 
calls/paging, 3.60/hr for in-room consultations, and 3.83/hr for protocoling.
CONCLUSION: Separating responsibilities into NIT and IIT workflows substantially 
increased image interpretation time and decreased TSEs for the primary fellow. 
Consolidation of NITs into a separate workflow may allow for more efficient task 
completion.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1067/j.cpradiol.2016.11.010
PMID: 28049559 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


437. Epilepsy Behav. 2012 Mar;23(3):254-60. doi: 10.1016/j.yebeh.2011.12.006. Epub 
2012 Feb 16.

Visuo-spatial memory tests in right temporal lobe epilepsy foci: clinical 
validity.

Wisniewski I(1), Wendling AS, Manning L, Steinhoff BJ.

Author information:
(1)Epilepsiezentrum Kork, Germany.

OBJECTIVE: To examine the appropriateness of visual memory tests as an 
identification method for right mesial temporal lobe dysfunctions in an epilepsy 
patient group and to study the relationship and possible overlap with non-memory 
cognitive domains and demographic variables.
METHODS: Eighty preoperative candidates with mesial temporal lobe epilepsy (TLE) 
were examined using the "Corsi Block-Tapping Test", "Diagnosticum für 
Cerebralschädigung" (DCS), the path subtest of the "Verbaler und Visueller 
Merkfähigkeitstest" (VVM), and the Rey-Osterrieth Complex Figure Test (ROCF). 
Factorial analyses were performed on raw scores to determine the effect of 
epilepsy-related variables, interictal epileptiform discharges (IEDs) and 
presence of cortical dysgenesis, on visual and verbal memory parameters. 
Sensitivity, specificity and Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) curves were 
calculated based on normative data. Furthermore, Spearman correlations between 
memory and non-memory cognitive tasks were performed.
RESULTS: The scores for test sensitivity and specificity and the ROC curves 
illustrate the tests' poor capacity to lateralize the functional deficit zone 
even when epilepsy-related factors, such as cortical dysgenesis or presence of 
contralateral IEDs were controlled. Significant correlations were found between 
the visual memory measures and nonverbal reasoning, processing speed, 
attentional flexibility, and visual planning.
CONCLUSION: These neuropsychological tests are not sensitive enough to 
lateralize the epileptogenic focus in temporal lobe epilepsy patients since in 
addition to learning and consolidation processes, they measure additional 
cognitive domains. These results have implications for clinical 
neuropsychologists, in terms of test choice and the interpretation in the 
context of presurgical diagnostics.

Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.yebeh.2011.12.006
PMID: 22341968 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


438. Brain. 2002 May;125(Pt 5):1024-38. doi: 10.1093/brain/awf093.

Posterior parietal cortex is implicated in continuous switching between verbal 
fluency tasks: an fMRI study with clinical implications.

Gurd JM(1), Amunts K, Weiss PH, Zafiris O, Zilles K, Marshall JC, Fink GR.

Author information:
(1)Neuropsychology Unit, University Department of Clinical Neurology, Radcliffe 
Infirmary, Oxford, UK. jenifer.gurd@clinical-neurology-oxford.ac.uk

We investigated whether posterior parietal cortex controls attentional switching 
when the tasks involve neither spatial nor visual cognition. Normal volunteers 
were scanned using functional MRI (fMRI). In all conditions, subjects were 
required to covertly produce words in verbal fluency tasks. They did so at a 
rate of one every 2 s (with eyes closed) in response to an auditory beep. In the 
non-switching (NS) trials, subjects responded with a series of items from a 
prespecified semantic category (SC) (e.g. fruits or cars) and from overlearned 
sequences (OSs) (days of the week, months of the year or letters of the 
alphabet). Instructions as to which category items should be drawn from on a 
given run of trials were presented over fMRI-compatible earphones prior to each 
run. In the switching (S) trials, subjects produced a series of word triads from 
three SCs: for example, fruits, cars and furniture (e.g. pear, Mercedes, 
table.); and from three OSs: days of the week, months of the year and letters of 
the alphabet (e.g. Monday, January, A.). This design is factorial, with the 
factors verbal class (SC or OSs) and switching conditions (S or NS). Increases 
in neural activity (P < 0.05, corrected for multiple comparisons) were observed 
only in superior posterior parietal cortex bilaterally as a main effect of the S 
conditions compared with the NS conditions. When SC fluency was compared with OS 
fluency, significant activations were found in anterior cingulate cortex 
bilaterally, the left inferior frontal gyrus, the middle frontal gyrus 
bilaterally, frontal operculum bilaterally and in the cerebellar vermis. These 
results support the hypothesis that superior posterior parietal cortex is a 
supramodal area implicated in task switching, even when no visual or spatial 
component is implicated in the tasks. Task switching, frequently used to examine 
'frontal' executive functions, may also be clinically relevant to the assessment 
of patients with superior posterior parietal lesions.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/awf093
PMID: 11960893 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


439. Brain Behav. 2015 May;5(5):e00324. doi: 10.1002/brb3.324. Epub 2015 Mar 13.

Functional network mediates age-related differences in reaction time: a 
replication and extension study.

Gazes Y(1), Habeck C(1), O'Shea D(1), Razlighi QR(1), Steffener J(1), Stern 
Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Cognitive Neuroscience Division, Department of Neurology, Columbia University 
College of Physicians and Surgeons P&S Box 16, 630 West 168th Street, New York, 
New York, 10032.

INTRODUCTION: A functional activation (i.e., ordinal trend) pattern was 
previously identified in both young and older adults during task-switching 
performance, the expression of which correlated with reaction time. The current 
study aimed to (1) replicate this functional activation pattern in a new group 
of fMRI activation data, and (2) extend the previous study by specifically 
examining whether the effect of aging on reaction time can be explained by 
differences in the activation of the functional activation pattern.
METHOD: A total of 47 young and 50 older participants were included in the 
extension analysis. Participants performed task-switching as the activation task 
and were cued by the color of the stimulus for the task to be performed in each 
block. To test for replication, two approaches were implemented. The first 
approach tested the replicability of the predictive power of the previously 
identified functional activation pattern by forward applying the pattern to the 
Study II data and the second approach was rederivation of the activation pattern 
in the Study II data.
RESULTS: Both approaches showed successful replication in the new data set. 
Using mediation analysis, expression of the pattern from the first approach was 
found to partially mediate age-related effects on reaction time such that older 
age was associated with greater activation of the brain pattern and longer 
reaction time, suggesting that brain activation efficiency (defined as "the rate 
of activation increase with increasing task difficulty" in Neuropsychologia 47, 
2009, 2015) of the regions in the Ordinal trend pattern directly accounts for 
age-related differences in task performance.
DISCUSSION: The successful replication of the functional activation pattern 
demonstrates the versatility of the Ordinal Trend Canonical Variates Analysis, 
and the ability to summarize each participant's brain activation map into one 
number provides a useful metric in multimodal analysis as well as cross-study 
comparisons.

DOI: 10.1002/brb3.324
PMCID: PMC4389056
PMID: 25874162 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


440. Neuroimage. 2015 Jul 1;114:356-70. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2015.04.021. Epub 
2015 Apr 15.

Watch out! Medial frontal cortex is activated by cues signaling potential 
changes in response demands.

van Noordt SJ(1), Desjardins JA(2), Segalowitz SJ(3).

Author information:
(1)Cognitive and Affective Neuroscience Laboratory, Canada; Department of 
Psychology, Brock University, St. Catharines, ON L2S 3A1, Canada. Electronic 
address: stefonv0@gmail.com.
(2)Cognitive and Affective Neuroscience Laboratory, Canada; Department of 
Psychology, Brock University, St. Catharines, ON L2S 3A1, Canada. Electronic 
address: jdesjardins@brocku.ca.
(3)Cognitive and Affective Neuroscience Laboratory, Canada; Department of 
Psychology, Brock University, St. Catharines, ON L2S 3A1, Canada. Electronic 
address: sid.segalowitz@brocku.ca.

The human medial frontal cortex and especially the anterior cingulate cortex 
(ACC) have been implicated in several aspects of performance monitoring. We 
examined event-related EEG during a general process of controlling attention by 
using a novel paradigm to elicit a medial frontal negativity (MFN) to stimuli 
that indicate potential changes in future response demands. Independent 
components analysis revealed that the latent factors that accounted for MFN 
activity to such changes also accounted for activity associated with the 
error-related negativity and the NoGo inhibitory N2. Given that the medial 
frontal activation to these changes varied reliably across subjects simply as a 
function of potential need to alter responses in the absence of error commission 
and response inhibition, we propose that the underlying basis for medial frontal 
activation in situations demanding ongoing monitoring of performance involves an 
increase in attention control, a factor common to all MFN paradigms.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2015.04.021
PMID: 25887260 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


441. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008 Sep 9;105(36):13592-7. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.0805423105. Epub 2008 Aug 29.

Neural predictors of moment-to-moment fluctuations in cognitive flexibility.

Leber AB(1), Turk-Browne NB, Chun MM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of New Hampshire, Durham, NH 03824, USA. 
andrew.leber@unh.edu

Cognitive flexibility is a crucial human ability allowing efficient adaptation 
to changing task challenges. Although a person's degree of flexibility can vary 
from moment to moment, the conditions regulating such fluctuations are not well 
understood. Using a task-switching procedure with fMRI, we found several brain 
regions in which neural activity preceding each trial predicted subsequent 
cognitive flexibility. Specifically, as pretrial activity increased, performance 
improved on trials when the task switched but did not improve when the task 
repeated. Regions from which flexibility could be predicted reliably included 
the basal ganglia, anterior cingulate cortex, prefrontal cortex, and posterior 
parietal cortex. Although further analysis revealed similarities across the 
regions in how flexibility was predicted, results supported the existence of 
multiple independent sources of prediction. These results reveal distinct neural 
mechanisms underlying fluctuations in cognitive flexibility.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0805423105
PMCID: PMC2527350
PMID: 18757744 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


442. Neuroimage. 2010 Jan 1;49(1):1099-107. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2009.07.036. 
Epub 2009 Jul 23.

Neural systems supporting lexical search guided by letter and semantic category 
cues: a self-paced overt response fMRI study of verbal fluency.

Birn RM(1), Kenworthy L, Case L, Caravella R, Jones TB, Bandettini PA, Martin A.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Brain and Cognition, National Institute of Mental Health, 
Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. rbirn@wisc.edu

Verbal fluency tasks have been widely used to evaluate language and executive 
control processes in the human brain. FMRI studies of verbal fluency, however, 
have used either silent word generation (which provides no behavioral measure) 
or cued generation of single words in order to contend with speech-related 
motion artifacts. In this study, we use a recently developed paradigm design to 
investigate the neural correlates of verbal fluency during overt, free recall, 
word generation so that performance and brain activity could be evaluated under 
conditions that more closely mirror standard behavioral test demands. We 
investigated verbal fluency to both letter and category cues in order to 
evaluate differential involvement of specific frontal and temporal lobe sites as 
a function of retrieval cue type, as suggested by previous neuropsychological 
and neuroimaging investigations. In addition, we incorporated both a task 
switching manipulation and an automatic speech condition in order to modulate 
the demand placed on executive functions. We found greater activation in the 
left hemisphere during category and letter fluency tasks, and greater right 
hemisphere activation during automatic speech. We also found that letter and 
category fluency tasks were associated with differential involvement of specific 
regions of the frontal and temporal lobes. These findings provide converging 
evidence that letter and category fluency performance is dependent on partially 
distinct neural circuitry. They also provide strong evidence that verbal fluency 
can be successfully evaluated in the MR environment using overt, self-paced, 
responses.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2009.07.036
PMCID: PMC2832834
PMID: 19632335 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


443. Neuropsychologia. 2014 Sep;62:390-7. doi: 
10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2014.05.023. Epub 2014 Jun 6.

Greater striatal responses to medication in Parkinson׳s disease are associated 
with better task-switching but worse reward performance.

Aarts E(1), Nusselein AA(2), Smittenaar P(2), Helmich RC(3), Bloem BR(4), Cools 
R(5).

Author information:
(1)Radboud University Nijmegen, Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and 
Behaviour, Centre for Cognitive Neuroimaging, P.O. Box 9101, 6500 HB Nijmegen, 
The Netherlands. Electronic address: aarts.esther@gmail.com.
(2)Radboud University Nijmegen, Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and 
Behaviour, Centre for Cognitive Neuroimaging, P.O. Box 9101, 6500 HB Nijmegen, 
The Netherlands.
(3)Radboud University Nijmegen, Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and 
Behaviour, Centre for Cognitive Neuroimaging, P.O. Box 9101, 6500 HB Nijmegen, 
The Netherlands; Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Donders Institute 
for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, Department of Neurology, Parkinson Centre 
Nijmegen (ParC), P.O. Box 9101, 6500 HB Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(4)Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Donders Institute for Brain, 
Cognition and Behaviour, Department of Neurology, Parkinson Centre Nijmegen 
(ParC), P.O. Box 9101, 6500 HB Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(5)Radboud University Nijmegen, Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and 
Behaviour, Centre for Cognitive Neuroimaging, P.O. Box 9101, 6500 HB Nijmegen, 
The Netherlands; Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Donders Institute 
for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, Department of Psychiatry, P.O. Box 9101, 
6500 HB Nijmegen, The Netherlands.

Dopaminergic medication in Parkinson's disease has been proposed to improve 
cognitive processing by modulating the severely depleted dorsal striatum, while 
impairing reward processing by modulating the relatively intact ventral 
striatum. However, there is no direct (neural) evidence for this hypothesis. 
Here we fill this gap by scanning Parkinson's disease patients (n=15) ON and 
relatively OFF their dopaminergic medication using functional magnetic resonance 
imaging. During scanning, patients performed a task that enabled the 
simultaneous measurement of task-switching and reward-related processing. 
Brain-behavior correlations revealed that medication-related increases (ON-OFF) 
in switch-related BOLD signal (switch-repeat) in the dorsomedial striatum were 
associated, on an individual basis, with improvements in task-switching (i.e. a 
decreased switch cost). Conversely, medication-related increases (ON-OFF) in 
reward-related BOLD signal (high-low) in the ventromedial striatum were 
associated, on an individual basis, with impairments in performance in 
anticipation of reward (i.e. an increased reward cost). Linear regression 
analyses demonstrated that the positive relationship between medication-related 
changes in BOLD and the reward cost was unique to the ventromedial striatum, 
whereas the negative relationship between medication-related changes in BOLD and 
the switch cost was not unique to the dorsomedial striatum. These findings 
extend the dopamine overdose hypothesis, according to which dopamine-induced 
changes in dorsal and ventral striatal processing lead to cognitive improvement 
and impairment respectively.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2014.05.023
PMID: 24912070 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


444. Neuroimage. 2013 Aug 15;77:207-14. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2013.03.057. Epub 
2013 Apr 6.

Switch probability context (in)sensitivity within the cognitive control network.

De Baene W(1), Brass M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental Psychology, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium. 
Wouter.DeBaene@ugent.be

Cognitive control processes refer to the ability to flexibly adapt one's 
thoughts and actions in the pursuit of an internal goal. Task preparation is a 
central aspect of cognitive control and has generally been studied using 
explicitly cued task-switching paradigms. Over the last decade, numerous fMRI 
studies have identified a fronto-parietal network to exhibit greater activity 
during the preparation of task switches than during the preparation of task 
repetitions, which is assumed to reflect endogenous cognitive control processes. 
There is, however, a huge variability in preparatory switch-specific brain 
activity reported in the imaging literature on task-switching. One factor that 
might explain this heterogeneity is the difference in switch probability across 
studies. In the current fMRI study, we examined which preparation-related 
cognitive control areas are susceptible to such contextual differences by 
manipulating the switch probability within subjects. In the low switch 
probability (30% switch trials) blocks, we found the frequently observed 
switch-related preparatory activation in fronto-parietal areas. In the high 
switch probability (50% switch trials) blocks, however, only part of these areas 
(more particularly the (pre-) SMA, extending into the dorsal ACC and the 
superior parietal lobule) showed higher activation in switch compared to repeat 
trials. The activation levels in the other areas (the lateral prefrontal cortex, 
inferior parietal lobule and middle temporal gyrus) were very similar for switch 
and repeat trials. Our results suggest a functional dissociation within the 
cognitive control network with some brain areas being sensitive to the switch 
probability context while others are not.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2013.03.057
PMID: 23567890 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


445. Atten Percept Psychophys. 2012 Apr;74(3):600-12. doi: 10.3758/s13414-011-0257-9.

Music training enhances the rapid plasticity of P3a/P3b event-related brain 
potentials for unattended and attended target sounds.

Seppänen M(1), Pesonen AK, Tervaniemi M.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Behavioural Sciences/Cognitive Brain Research Unit, University 
of Helsinki, Finland. miia.seppanen@helsinki.fi

Neurocognitive studies have shown that extensive musical training enhances P3a 
and P3b event-related potentials for infrequent target sounds, which reflects 
stronger attention switching and stimulus evaluation in musicians than in 
nonmusicians. However, it is unknown whether the short-term plasticity of P3a 
and P3b responses is also enhanced in musicians. We compared the short-term 
plasticity of P3a and P3b responses to infrequent target sounds in musicians and 
nonmusicians during auditory perceptual learning tasks. Target sounds, deviating 
in location, pitch, and duration with three difficulty levels, were interspersed 
among frequently presented standard sounds in an oddball paradigm. We found that 
during passive exposure to sounds, musicians had habituation of the P3a, while 
nonmusicians showed enhancement of the P3a between blocks. Between active tasks, 
P3b amplitudes for duration deviants were reduced (habituated) in musicians 
only, and showed a more posterior scalp topography for habituation when compared 
to P3bs of nonmusicians. In both groups, the P3a and P3b latencies were 
shortened for deviating sounds. Also, musicians were better than nonmusicians at 
discriminating target deviants. Regardless of musical training, better 
discrimination was associated with higher working memory capacity. We concluded 
that music training enhances short-term P3a/P3b plasticity, indicating 
training-induced changes in attentional skills.

DOI: 10.3758/s13414-011-0257-9
PMID: 22222306 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


446. Psychophysiology. 2010 Nov;47(6):1019-27. doi: 10.1111/j.1469-8986.2010.01027.x.

Anticipating the consequences of action: an fMRI study of intention-based task 
preparation.

Ruge H(1), Müller SC, Braver TS.

Author information:
(1)Neuroimaging Center, Department of Psychology, Technische Universität 
Dresden, Dresden, Germany. ruge@psychologie.tu-dresden.de

A key component of task preparation may be to anticipate the consequences of 
task-appropriate actions. This task switching study examined whether such type 
of "intentional" preparatory control relies on the presentation of explicit 
action effects. Preparatory BOLD activation in a condition with task-specific 
motion effect feedback was compared to identical task conditions with accuracy 
feedback only. Switch-related activation was found selectively in the effect 
feedback condition in the middle mid-frontal gyrus and in the anterior 
intraparietal sulcus. Consistent with research on attentional control, the 
posterior superior parietal lobule exhibited switch-related preparatory 
activation irrespective of feedback type. To conclude, preparatory control can 
occur via complementary attentional and intentional neural mechanisms depending 
on whether meaningful task-specific action effects lead to the formation of 
explicit effect representations.

Copyright © 2010 Society for Psychophysiological Research.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1469-8986.2010.01027.x
PMCID: PMC3268076
PMID: 20477978 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


447. Int J Psychophysiol. 2011 Oct;82(1):97-106. doi: 10.1016/j.ijpsycho.2011.06.019. 
Epub 2011 Jul 12.

Error-related processing following severe traumatic brain injury: an 
event-related functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) study.

Sozda CN(1), Larson MJ, Kaufman DA, Schmalfuss IM, Perlstein WM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical and Health Psychology, University of Florida, 
Gainesville, FL 32610, United States.

Continuous monitoring of one's performance is invaluable for guiding behavior 
towards successful goal attainment by identifying deficits and strategically 
adjusting responses when performance is inadequate. In the present study, we 
exploited the advantages of event-related functional magnetic resonance imaging 
(fMRI) to examine brain activity associated with error-related processing after 
severe traumatic brain injury (sTBI). fMRI and behavioral data were acquired 
while 10 sTBI participants and 12 neurologically-healthy controls performed a 
task-switching cued-Stroop task. fMRI data were analyzed using a random-effects 
whole-brain voxel-wise general linear model and planned linear contrasts. 
Behaviorally, sTBI patients showed greater error-rate interference than 
neurologically-normal controls. fMRI data revealed that, compared to controls, 
sTBI patients showed greater magnitude error-related activation in the anterior 
cingulate cortex (ACC) and an increase in the overall spatial extent of 
error-related activation across cortical and subcortical regions. Implications 
for future research and potential limitations in conducting fMRI research in 
neurologically-impaired populations are discussed, as well as some potential 
benefits of employing multimodal imaging (e.g., fMRI and event-related 
potentials) of cognitive control processes in TBI.

Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijpsycho.2011.06.019
PMCID: PMC3199028
PMID: 21756946 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


448. Psychophysiology. 1990 Nov;27(6):627-40. doi: 
10.1111/j.1469-8986.1990.tb03184.x.

Brain generators implicated in the processing of auditory stimulus deviance: a 
topographic event-related potential study.

Giard MH(1), Perrin F, Pernier J, Bouchet P.

Author information:
(1)Brain Signals and Processes Laboratory, INSERM-U280, Lyon, France.

The neurophysiological mechanisms underlying mismatch negativity (MMN) can be 
inferred from an examination of some of the brain generators involved in the 
process of this event-related potential (ERP) component. ERPs were recorded in 
two studies in which the subjects were involved in a selective dichotic 
listening task. Subjects were required to silently count rare stimuli deviating 
in pitch from a sequence of standard stimuli in one ear, while ignoring all the 
stimuli (standards and deviants) delivered randomly to the other ear. The 
results showed that, in all cases, the negative wave elicited by the deviant 
stimuli showed the highest amplitudes over the right hemiscalp irrespective of 
the ear of stimulation or the direction of attention. Scalp radial current 
density analysis showed that this asymmetric potential distribution could be 
attributed to the sum of activities of two sets of neural generators: one 
temporal, located in the vicinity of the primary auditory cortex, predominantly 
activated in the hemisphere contralateral to the ear of stimulation, and the 
other frontal, involving mainly the right hemisphere. The results are discussed 
in light of Näätänen's model: we suggest the dissociation of two functional 
processes on the basis of activity of distinct brain areas: a sensory memory 
mechanism related to the temporal generators, and an automatic 
attention-switching process related to the frontal generators.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1469-8986.1990.tb03184.x
PMID: 2100348 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


449. Neurobiol Learn Mem. 2008 Sep;90(2):339-46. doi: 10.1016/j.nlm.2008.04.005. Epub 
2008 May 19.

Neonatal ventral hippocampus lesions disrupt extra-dimensional shift and alter 
dendritic spine density in the medial prefrontal cortex of juvenile rats.

Marquis JP(1), Goulet S, Doré FY.

Author information:
(1)Ecole de Psychologie, Université Laval Pavillon F.-A., Savard, Québec, Qué. 
G1K7P4, Canada.

Recent data showed that neonatal ventral hippocampus (VH) lesions, an approach 
used to model schizophrenia symptoms in rodents, produce premature deficits of 
working memory believed to be associated with early medial prefrontal cortex 
(mPFC) maldevelopment. This experiment expands the investigation of mPFC 
integrity in juvenile rats with neonatal VH lesions by assessing behavioral 
flexibility and dendritic spine density. Sixteen Sprague-Dawley male pups 
received bilateral microinjections of ibotenic acid in the VH or SHAM surgery on 
postnatal day (PND) 6. On PND 29 and 30, rats were subjected to a spatial shift 
task in a cross-maze; an attentional set-shifting task was then administered on 
two consecutive days, between PND 33 and PND 35. Rats were sacrificed at PND 36 
and dendritic spine density in the mPFC was assessed using Golgi-Cox staining 
procedure. Results revealed impaired extra-dimensional shift in VH-lesioned rats 
and inconsistent reversal discrimination outcomes. Although lesioned animals 
displayed intact performance in the spatial shift, rates of perseverative 
responses were higher than normal in this task. Neonatal VH damage resulted in 
lower dendritic spine density in the mPFC than measured in control brains; 
however, no significant correlation was found between this outcome and 
behavioral data. Juvenile morphological and cognitive perturbations are 
consistent with the early emergence of mPFC anomalies following neonatal VH 
lesions. Results are discussed in relation with potential common mechanisms 
linking pre- and post-pubertal onsets of behavioral dysfunction.

DOI: 10.1016/j.nlm.2008.04.005
PMID: 18490183 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


450. Neuroimage. 2002 Oct;17(2):792-802.

Evidence for anterior cingulate cortex involvement in monitoring preparatory 
attentional set.

Luks TL(1), Simpson GV, Feiwell RJ, Miller WL.

Author information:
(1)Dynamic NeuroImaging Laboratory, University of California San Francisco, 
94143-0628, USA.

An important cognitive function underlying unified, voluntary behavior is 
attentional control. Two frontal regions, anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) and 
dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC), appear to be particularly involved in 
attentional control and monitoring. In this study, we investigated whether ACC 
is involved in monitoring the preparatory allocation of attention during task 
switching, or whether ACC is active only when subjects are processing target 
stimuli and selecting a response, via a cued-attention design. Event-related 
BOLD fMRI activity was examined using a cue-target paradigm in which subjects 
performed task switches that selectively required reallocation of attention when 
tasks changed. There were three cue conditions: informative switch, informative 
repeat, and neutral. There were four target conditions: informatively cued 
switch, informatively cued repeat, neutrally cued switch, and neutrally cued 
repeat. Significant ACC activity was observed following both informative switch 
and informative repeat cues, but not after neutral cues. No significant ACC 
activity was observed following any of the target conditions. Significant DLPFC 
activity was observed following all three cue conditions and following neutrally 
cued switch targets. Overall, our results suggest that ACC is involved in 
monitoring the preparatory allocation of attention for conflict at the level of 
activation of competing attentional sets. The results also support the role of 
DLPFC in holding cognitive goals in working memory and allocating attention to 
the appropriate processing systems to meet those goals.

PMID: 12377154 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


451. Brain Res. 2006 Aug 11;1105(1):61-72. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2006.02.027. Epub 
2006 Apr 13.

Using advance information in dynamic cognitive control: an ERP study of 
task-switching.

Swainson R(1), Jackson SR, Jackson GM.

Author information:
(1)School of Psychology, University of Nottingham, University Park, Nottingham 
NG7 2RD, UK. rachel.swainson@nottingham.ac.uk <rachel.swainson@nottingham.ac.uk>

Ensuring that behavior remains appropriate over time requires dynamic, flexible 
control. We used the task-switching procedure to investigate the mechanisms 
whereby advance information is used to control behavior under conditions of 
frequently changing task-rules. The color of target stimuli signaled which 
task-set (or behavioral 'rule') was required on each trial. We provided 
different forms of advance information in two conditions and found a double 
dissociation in their effects: visual precues ('precueing') facilitated 
task-switching, whereas a fixed task-sequence ('predictability') facilitated 
task-repetition. In addition, precueing was associated with a late parietal 
positive ERP which preceded target onset, whereas predictability produced an 
increase in the target-locked centro-parietal P3b ERP. We suggest that these 
results indicate the activity of two distinct mechanisms. The first, driven by a 
task-cue and indexed by the late parietal positivity, may drive efficient 
task-performance on precued switch trials but occurs too late on non-precued 
switch trials to index an anticipatory task-set reconfiguration process. The 
second may constitute active consolidation or maintenance of a particular 
task-set which occurs at least one trial ahead, when task-repetitions are 
predictable, and results in facilitation of target stimulus evaluation.

DOI: 10.1016/j.brainres.2006.02.027
PMID: 16626653 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


452. Brain Res. 2018 Jan 1;1678:1-11. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2017.09.032. Epub 2017 
Oct 3.

On the functional significance of retrieval mode: Task switching disrupts the 
recollection of conceptual stimulus information from episodic memory.

Küper K(1).

Author information:
(1)Aging Group, Leibniz Research Centre for Working Environment and Human 
Factors, Dortmund, Germany; Brain & Cognition Group, Department of Psychology, 
Saarland University, Saarbrücken, Germany. Electronic address: kueper@ifado.de.

Episodic memory retrieval is assumed to be associated with the tonic cognitive 
state of retrieval mode. Despite extensive research into the neurophysiological 
correlates of retrieval mode, as of yet, relatively little is known about its 
functional significance. The present event-related potential (ERP) study was 
aimed at examining the impact of retrieval mode on the specificity of memory 
content retrieved in the course of familiarity and recollection processes. In 
two experiments, participants performed a recognition memory inclusion task in 
which they had to distinguish identically repeated and re-colored versions of 
study items from new items. In Experiment 1, participants had to alternate 
between the episodic memory task and a semantic task requiring a 
natural/artificial decision. In Experiment 2, the two tasks were instead 
performed in separate blocks. ERPs locked to the preparatory cues in the test 
phases indicated that participants did not establish retrieval mode on switch 
trials in Experiment 1. In the absence of retrieval mode, neither type of 
studied item elicited ERP correlates of familiarity-based retrieval (FN400). 
Recollection-related late positive complex (LPC) old/new effects emerged only 
for identically repeated but not for conceptually identical but perceptually 
changed versions of study items. With blocked retrieval in Experiment 2, both 
types of old items instead elicited equivalent FN400 and LPC old/new effects. 
The LPC data indicate that retrieval mode may play an important role in the 
successful recollection of conceptual stimulus information. The FN400 results 
additionally suggest that task switching may have a detrimental effect on 
familiarity-based memory retrieval.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.brainres.2017.09.032
PMID: 28986084 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


453. Neuroimage. 2006 Jan 15;29(2):475-84. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2005.07.027. 
Epub 2005 Aug 22.

Change detection in children with autism: an auditory event-related fMRI study.

Gomot M(1), Bernard FA, Davis MH, Belmonte MK, Ashwin C, Bullmore ET, 
Baron-Cohen S.

Author information:
(1)Autism Research Centre, Department of Psychiatry, University of Cambridge, 
UK. m.gomot@chu-tours.fr

Autism involves impairments in communication and social interaction, as well as 
high levels of repetitive, stereotypic, and ritualistic behaviours, and extreme 
resistance to change. This latter dimension, whilst required for a diagnosis, 
has received less research attention. We hypothesise that this extreme 
resistance to change in autism is rooted in atypical processing of unexpected 
stimuli. We tested this using auditory event-related fMRI to determine regional 
brain activity associated with passive detection of infrequently occurring 
frequency-deviant and complex novel sounds in a no-task condition. Participants 
were twelve 10- to 15-year-old children with autism and a group of 12 age- and 
sex-matched healthy controls. During deviance detection, significant activation 
common to both groups was located in the superior temporal and inferior frontal 
gyri. During 'novelty detection', both groups showed activity in the superior 
temporal gyrus, the temporo-parietal junction, the superior and inferior frontal 
gyri, and the cingulate gyrus. Children with autism showed reduced activation of 
the left anterior cingulate cortex during both deviance and novelty detection. 
During novelty detection, children with autism also showed reduced activation in 
the bilateral temporo-parietal region and in the right inferior and middle 
frontal areas. This study confirms previous evidence from ERP studies of 
atypical brain function related to automatic change detection in autism. 
Abnormalities involved a cortical network known to have a role in attention 
switching and attentional resource distribution. These results throw light on 
the neurophysiological processes underlying autistic 'resistance to change'.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2005.07.027
PMID: 16115783 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


454. Eur J Neurosci. 2008 Oct;28(7):1404-18. doi: 10.1111/j.1460-9568.2008.06439.x.

The role of spatial information in advance task-set control: an event-related 
potential study.

Astle DE(1), Jackson GM, Swainson R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental Psychology, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK. 
duncan.astle@psy.ox.ac.uk

Task-switching has proved to be a fruitful paradigm for studying cognitive 
control mechanisms. Interestingly, this avenue of study has revealed that 
subjects are, to some degree, able to bring about a change in task-set prior to 
the performance of that task (provided that they are given advance warning of 
the upcoming task, for instance in the form of a cue). Event-related potentials 
(ERPs) have proved to be a good way of measuring these rapid anticipatory 
control processes. To explore these processes further, the current study 
examined the relationship between the availability of spatial information and 
cue-locked task-switching ERP effects. Two groups of subjects were compared: one 
group could separate the task-sets on the basis of the targets' colour (the 
'colour' group), the second on the basis of the targets' location (the 'spatial' 
group). The performance of both groups benefited to the same extent from advance 
cueing of task-transitions (switches or repeats), yet the ERP data revealed 
cue-locked (but not target-locked) differences between the two groups. The most 
striking of these differences was the absence of both a late positivity over 
posterior scalp and a late negativity over frontal scalp when the spatial group 
switched between tasks. Thus, it seems unlikely that these effects index 
stimulus-response 'reconfiguration'per se--as the mappings were identical for 
both groups of subjects--but rather that these task-switching processes are 
sensitive to how the mappings are represented.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1460-9568.2008.06439.x
PMID: 18973567 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


455. Cogn Affect Behav Neurosci. 2007 Dec;7(4):286-96. doi: 10.3758/cabn.7.4.286.

At your own peril: an ERP study of voluntary task set selection processes in the 
medial frontal cortex.

Forstmann BU(1), Ridderinkhof KR, Kaiser J, Bledowski C.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The 
Netherlands. b.u.forstmann@uva.nl

A tool that is commonly used to investigate selection among different 
alternatives in a changing environment is the task-switching paradigm. 
Functional neuroimaging has pointed out a role for the posterior medial frontal 
cortex and the posterior parietal cortex in the voluntary selection of task 
sets. In the present study, we set out to investigate the temporal dynamics of 
these agency-related processes (in task choice vs. no-choice conditions) using 
event-related brain potentials (ERPs). The results revealed agency-related 
modulations of a series of ERP components, including (1) an early 
parieto-occipital activation, taken to reflect the evaluation of choice versus 
no choice; (2) a subsequent medial frontal expression of the voluntary selection 
between task sets; (3) a CNV-like sustained negativity in preparation for the 
target; (4) a target-induced N210-P210 complex, taken to reflect early 
sensory-perceptual processing; and (5) a target-induced P3, associated with the 
evaluation of the stimulus and its designated response vis-à-vis the chosen 
versus competing task sets. Together, these results indicate that the 
opportunity to choose between tasks invokes activity originating from the medial 
frontal cortex, associated with voluntary task set selection, but also 
activation at different time points in a number of other brain areas, not 
necessarily captured by functional neuroimaging.

DOI: 10.3758/cabn.7.4.286
PMID: 18189002 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


456. Technol Health Care. 2018;26(3):401-407. doi: 10.3233/THC-171051.

Best core stabilization exercise to facilitate subcortical neuroplasticity: A 
functional MRI neuroimaging study.

Kim DH(1), Lee JJ(2), You SJH(2).

Author information:
(1)HIP and MAL Laboratory, Department of Rehabilitation Science, Inje 
University, Gimhae, Korea.
(2)Institute of Sports Movement Artificial-Intelligence Technology, Department 
of Physical Therapy, Yonsei University, Wonju, Korea.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the effects of conscious (ADIM) and subconscious (DNS) 
core stabilization exercises on cortical changes in adults with core 
instability.
PARTICIPANTS: Five non-symptomatic participants with core instability.
METHODS: A novel core stabilization task switching paradigm was designed to 
separate cortical or subcortical neural substrates during a series of DNS or 
ADIM core stabilization tasks.
RESULTS: fMRI blood BOLD analysis revealed a distinctive subcortical activation 
pattern during the performance of the DNS, whereas the cortical motor network 
was primarily activated during an ADIM. Peak voxel volume values showed 
significantly greater DNS (11.08 ± 1.51) compared with the ADIM (8.81 ± 0.21) 
(p= 0.043).
CONCLUSION: The ADIM exercise activated the cortical PMC-SMC-SMA motor network, 
whereas the DNS exercise activated both these same cortical areas and the 
subcortical cerebellum-BG-thalamus-cingulate cortex network.

DOI: 10.3233/THC-171051
PMID: 29614707 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


457. PLoS One. 2013 Sep 13;8(9):e73028. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0073028. 
eCollection 2013.

Bilinguals use language-control brain areas more than monolinguals to perform 
non-linguistic switching tasks.

Rodríguez-Pujadas A(1), Sanjuán A, Ventura-Campos N, Román P, Martin C, Barceló 
F, Costa A, Avila C.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Universitat Jaume I, Castelló de la Plana, Spain.

We tested the hypothesis that early bilinguals use language-control brain areas 
more than monolinguals when performing non-linguistic executive control tasks. 
We do so by exploring the brain activity of early bilinguals and monolinguals in 
a task-switching paradigm using an embedded critical trial design. Crucially, 
the task was designed such that the behavioural performance of the two groups 
was comparable, allowing then to have a safer comparison between the 
corresponding brain activity in the two groups. Despite the lack of behavioural 
differences between both groups, early bilinguals used language-control 
areas--such as left caudate, and left inferior and middle frontal gyri--more 
than monolinguals, when performing the switching task. Results offer direct 
support for the notion that, early bilingualism exerts an effect in the neural 
circuitry responsible for executive control. This effect partially involves the 
recruitment of brain areas involved in language control when performing 
domain-general executive control tasks, highlighting the cross-talk between 
these two domains.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0073028
PMCID: PMC3772880
PMID: 24058456 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.


458. Neuroimage. 2004 Oct;23(2):604-12. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2004.06.007.

Cognitive control in the posterior frontolateral cortex: evidence from common 
activations in task coordination, interference control, and working memory.

Derrfuss J(1), Brass M, von Cramon DY.

Author information:
(1)Max Planck Institute for Human Cognitive and Brain Sciences, Department of 
Neurology, Stephanstr. 1A, 04103 Leipzig, Germany. derrfuss@cbs.mpg.de

Cognitive control has often been associated with activations of middorsolateral 
prefrontal cortex. However, recent evidence highlights the importance of a more 
posterior frontolateral region around the junction of the inferior frontal 
sulcus and the inferior precentral sulcus (the inferior frontal junction area, 
IFJ). In the present experiment, we investigated the involvement of the IFJ in a 
task-switching paradigm, a manual Stroop task, and a verbal n-back task in a 
within-session within-group design. After computing contrasts for the individual 
tasks, the resulting z maps were overlaid to identify areas commonly activated 
by these tasks. Common activations were found in the IFJ, in the pre-SMA 
extending into mesial BA 8, in the middle frontal gyrus bordering the inferior 
frontal sulcus, in the anterior insula, and in parietal and thalamic regions. 
These results indicate the existence of a network of prefrontal, parietal, and 
subcortical regions mediating cognitive control in task coordination, 
interference control, and working memory. In particular, the results provide 
evidence for the assumption that, in the frontolateral cortex, not only the 
middorsolateral region but also the IFJ plays an important role in cognitive 
control.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2004.06.007
PMID: 15488410 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


459. Cereb Cortex. 2025 Aug 1;35(8):bhaf228. doi: 10.1093/cercor/bhaf228.

Eight-week high intensity jump training does not change neural correlates of 
executive functions and emotion regulation in young adults.

Wallenwein LA(1), Schmidt SNL(1), Barzyk P(2), Bieleke M(2), Schüler J(2), 
Gruber M(2), Mier D(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Konstanz, Universitätsstraße 10, 
78464 Konstanz, Germany.
(2)Department of Sport Science, University of Konstanz, Universitätsstraße 10, 
78464 Konstanz, Germany.

Exercise can positively impact cognitive abilities. However, studies assessing 
the impact of exercise on related constructs, such as emotion regulation, are 
missing. Further, little is known about the effects of exercise on cognition and 
accompanying changes in neural activation in healthy young adults. In this 
randomized controlled trial, we tested the effect of a chronic exercise 
intervention with an extensive set of tasks probing executive functioning and 
emotion regulation in fMRI. University students were either assigned to an 
8-week high intensity low volume jump training intervention or to a control 
group. Physical fitness measurements and fMRI-scans during working memory, task 
switching, response inhibition, and cognitive reappraisal of 58 participants 
were analyzed. The training intervention resulted in an expected improvement in 
jump performance but not in aerobic capacity. Moreover, the training did not 
improve executive functioning or emotion regulation performance. While we found 
strong fronto-parietal brain activation over both timepoints, the training 
resulted only in insubstantial changes. Likewise, individual changes in aerobic 
capacity and jump performance were not related to improvements in cognitive 
performance or changes in brain activation. In conclusion, our study does not 
support positive effects of exercise interventions on executive functions or 
emotion regulation in healthy young adults.

© The Author(s) 2025. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. 
For commercial re-use, please contact reprints@oup.com for reprints and 
translation rights for reprints. All other permissions can be obtained through 
our RightsLink service via the Permissions link on the article page on our 
site—for further information please contact journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/cercor/bhaf228
PMID: 40862525 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


460. Neuroimage. 2016 Jul 1;134:250-260. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2016.03.079. Epub 
2016 Apr 13.

Simultaneous interpreters vs. professional multilingual controls: Group 
differences in cognitive control as well as brain structure and function.

Becker M(1), Schubert T(2), Strobach T(3), Gallinat J(4), Kühn S(5).

Author information:
(1)University Clinic Hamburg-Eppendorf, Clinic and Policlinic for Psychiatry and 
Psychotherapy, Martinistraße 52, 20246 Hamburg, Germany. Electronic address: 
max.becker@uke.de.
(2)Humboldt University Berlin, Department of Psychology, RudowerChaussee 18, 
12489 Berlin, Germany.
(3)Medical School Hamburg, Department of Psychology, Am Kaiserkai 1, 20457 
Hamburg, Germany.
(4)University Clinic Hamburg-Eppendorf, Clinic and Policlinic for Psychiatry and 
Psychotherapy, Martinistraße 52, 20246 Hamburg, Germany.
(5)University Clinic Hamburg-Eppendorf, Clinic and Policlinic for Psychiatry and 
Psychotherapy, Martinistraße 52, 20246 Hamburg, Germany; Max-Planck-Institute 
for Human Development, Center for Lifespan Psychology, Lentzeallee 94, 14195 
Berlin, Germany. Electronic address: kuehn@mpib-berlin.mpg.de.

There is a vast amount of literature indicating that multiple language expertise 
leads to positive transfer effects onto other non-language cognitive domains 
possibly due to enhanced cognitive control. However, there is hardly any 
evidence about underlying mechanisms on how complex behavior like simultaneous 
interpreting benefits cognitive functioning in other non-language domains. 
Therefore, we investigated whether simultaneous interpreters (SIs) exhibit 
cognitive benefits in tasks measuring aspects of cognitive control compared to a 
professional multilingual control group. We furthermore investigated in how far 
potential cognitive benefits are related to brain structure (using voxel-based 
morphometry) and function (using regions-of-interest-based functional 
connectivity and graph-analytical measures on low-frequency BOLD signals in 
resting-state brain data). Concerning cognitive control, the results reveal that 
SIs exhibit less mixing costs in a task switching paradigm and a dual-task 
advantage compared to professional multilingual controls. In addition, SIs show 
more gray matter volume in the left frontal pole (BA 10) compared to controls. 
Graph theoretical analyses revealed that this region exhibits higher network 
values for global efficiency and degree and is functionally more strongly 
connected to the left inferior frontal gyrus and middle temporal gyrus in SIs 
compared to controls. Thus, the data provide evidence that SIs possess cognitive 
benefits in tasks measuring cognitive control. It is discussed in how far the 
central role of the left frontal pole and its stronger functional connectivity 
to the left inferior frontal gyrus represents a correlate of the neural 
mechanisms for the observed behavioral effects.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2016.03.079
PMID: 27085505 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


461. Behav Brain Res. 2002 Nov 15;136(2):399-404. doi: 10.1016/s0166-4328(02)00187-0.

Medial temporal lobe activity during semantic classification using a flexible 
fMRI design.

Daselaar SM(1), Veltman DJ, Rombouts SA, Raaijmakers JG, Lazeron RH, Jonker C.

Author information:
(1)Institute for Research in Extramural Medicine, Vrije Universiteit Medical 
Center, c/o Secr EMGO Dept vd Boechorstraat 7, 1081 BT Amsterdam, The 
Netherlands. sm.daselaar@vumc.nl

In this study, we evaluated the use of a self-paced fMRI design, to allow a 
flexible speed of responding with only four alternating stimulus blocks to 
minimize the influence of task switching on a group of young subjects. This was 
done in view of our intention to use such a design on groups of elderly and 
demented subjects in the near future. In addition, the hypothesis was tested 
that the medial temporal lobe is involved in semantic memory similar to episodic 
memory using a semantic retrieval task. In line with previous imaging studies 
that compared a semantic (living/nonliving) to a perceptual (alphabetically 
ascending/descending) classification condition, activity was seen in lateral 
temporal and inferior frontal regions, indicating the applicability of our 
design. Additional activity was seen in the right, and, at a slightly lower 
threshold, also in the left MTL, providing support for the involvement of the 
MTL in retrieval from semantic memory.

Copyright 2002 Elsevier Science B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/s0166-4328(02)00187-0
PMID: 12429401 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


462. Neuropsychologia. 2010 Dec;48(14):4136-41. doi: 
10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2010.10.005. Epub 2010 Oct 8.

The role of DAT1 gene on the rapid detection of task novelty.

Garcia-Garcia M(1), Barceló F, Clemente IC, Escera C.

Author information:
(1)Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behavior (IR3C), University of Barcelona, 
Barcelona, Spain.

In an environment with a myriad of different stimuli, the fast detection of 
novel and behaviorally relevant signals becomes crucial for an adaptive 
behavior. The detection of task-novelty has been related to striatum-prefrontal 
cortex (PFC) pathways involving dopaminergic (DA) neurotransmission. Here we 
thus tested the hypothesis that DA regulates the detection of task novelty 
through the modulation of the auditory N1 potential, an auditory potential 
peaking at 100 ms and previously shown to be modulated by the detection of 
sensory novelty. Thirty-five healthy volunteers were divided in two groups 
according to the presence or absence of the 9-repetition allele (9R) of the 
SLC6A3/DAT1 gene for the dopamine transporter. Participants performed a cued 
task-switching paradigm that dissociated the effects of exogenous sensory 
novelty from those of endogenous task novelty. Individuals with the 9R allele 
showed an amplitude enhancement of the auditory N1 elicited to sensory changes 
requiring a task-set reconfiguration as compared to sensory changes with no task 
novelty. In contrast, individuals without the 9R allele did not have their N1 
waveform modulated by task novelty. The present results suggest that individuals 
homozygous for the 10-repeat allele fail to detect the behavioral relevance of 
new stimuli at early stages.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2010.10.005
PMID: 20933528 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


463. Clin Neurophysiol. 2008 Jan;119(1):100-15. doi: 10.1016/j.clinph.2007.09.064.

Event-related potentials to pitch and rise time change in children with reading 
disabilities and typically reading children.

Hämäläinen JA(1), Leppänen PH, Guttorm TK, Lyytinen H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Jyväskylä, PO Box 35, Agora, 40014 
Jyväskylä, Finland. jarmo.hamalainen@psyka.jyu.fi

OBJECTIVE: The purpose of the present study was to investigate whether children 
with reading disabilities (RD) process rise time and pitch changes differently 
to control children as a function of the interval between two tones.
METHODS: Children participated in passive oddball event-related potential (ERP) 
measurements using paired stimuli. Mismatch negativity (MMN), P3a and late 
discriminative negativity (LDN) responses to rise time and pitch changes were 
examined.
RESULTS: Control children produced larger responses than children with RD to 
pitch change in the P3a component but only when the sounds in the pair were 
close to each other. Compared to children with RD, MMN was smaller and LDN 
larger in control children in response to rise time change when the sounds in 
the pair were further apart. The non-overlap in ERP measures between the groups 
was 40-50%.
CONCLUSIONS: Problems in rapid processing of pitch change were reflected in a 
component associated with attention switching while amplitude envelope 
processing problems were reflected in components associated with stimulus 
detection or discrimination.
SIGNIFICANCE: Children with RD process both rise time and pitch changes 
differently from control children thus providing evidence for the nature of 
amplitude envelope processing and rapid auditory processing deficits in 
dyslexia.

DOI: 10.1016/j.clinph.2007.09.064
PMID: 18320604 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


464. Neuropsychopharmacology. 2010 Aug;35(9):1943-51. doi: 10.1038/npp.2010.68. Epub 
2010 May 12.

Striatal dopamine mediates the interface between motivational and cognitive 
control in humans: evidence from genetic imaging.

Aarts E(1), Roelofs A, Franke B, Rijpkema M, Fernández G, Helmich RC, Cools R.

Author information:
(1)Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, Radboud University 
Nijmegen, Nijmegen, The Netherlands. e.aarts@donders.ru.nl

Dopamine has been hypothesized to provide the basis for the interaction between 
motivational and cognitive control. However, there is no evidence for this 
hypothesis in humans. We fill this gap by using fMRI, a novel behavioral 
paradigm and a common polymorphism in the DAT1 gene (SLC6A3). Carriers of the 
9-repeat (9R) allele of a 40 base pair repeat polymorphism in the 3' 
untranslated region of DAT1, associated with high striatal dopamine, showed 
greater activity in the ventromedial striatum during reward anticipation than 
homozygotes for the 10-repeat allele, replicating previous genetic imaging 
studies. The crucial novel finding is that 9R carriers also exhibited a greater 
influence of anticipated reward on switch costs, as well as greater activity in 
the dorsomedial striatum during task switching in anticipation of high reward 
relative to low reward. These data establish a crucial role for human striatal 
dopamine in the modulation of cognitive flexibility by reward anticipation, 
thus, elucidating the neurochemical mechanism of the interaction between 
motivation and cognitive control.

DOI: 10.1038/npp.2010.68
PMCID: PMC3055632
PMID: 20463658 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


465. Neuroimage. 2004 Mar;21(3):894-903. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2003.10.025.

Hemispheric specialization of the lateral prefrontal cortex for strategic 
processing during spatial and shape working memory.

Manoach DS(1), White NS, Lindgren KA, Heckers S, Coleman MJ, Dubal S, Holzman 
PS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Charlestown, MA 
02129, USA. dara@nmr.mgh.harvard.edu

OBJECTIVE: We investigated whether spatial working memory (WM) is associated 
with functional specialization of the right prefrontal cortex (PFC) relative to 
WM for shapes. We designed spatial and shape WM tasks that are relatively easy 
to perform and that minimize both task-switching and manipulation demands. The 
tasks use identical stimuli and require the same motor response.
METHODS: We presented 12 subjects with target shapes that appeared in particular 
locations. Subjects maintained either the location or the shape of the targets 
in WM and responded to each probe by indicating whether it was a target. During 
a non-WM control task, subjects indicated whether the probe appeared on the 
right or left side of the screen. Subjects were scanned with a 3.0 T Siemens 
scanner and data were analyzed using SPM99. The WM tasks were compared to 
identify PFC activation that was different for spatial versus shape WM. Each WM 
task was also compared to the control task.
RESULTS: compared with shape WM, spatial WM performance was faster and more 
accurate and was associated with increased right ventrolateral and frontopolar 
PFC activation. In contrast, compared to spatial WM, shape WM was associated 
with increased left ventrolateral PFC activity.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings demonstrate hemispheric specialization for spatial 
versus shape WM in the ventrolateral PFC. The increased activity in the right 
PFC for spatial WM cannot be attributed to increased task difficulty, the 
stimuli used, or the response requirements. Rather, we propose that differences 
in performance and activation reflect the use of configural processing 
strategies for spatial WM.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2003.10.025
PMID: 15006656 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


466. J Int Neuropsychol Soc. 2005 Jul;11(4):482-7.

Motor and non-motor sequence learning in children and adolescents with 
cerebellar damage.

Berger A(1), Sadeh M, Tzur G, Shuper IA, Kornreich L, Inbar D, Cohen IJ, 
Michowiz S, Yaniv I, Constantini S, Vakil E.

Author information:
(1)Department of Behavioral Sciences, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Beer 
Sheva 84105 Israel. andrea@bgu.ac.il

Cerebellar involvement in motor and non-motor sequence learning was examined 
with serial reaction time tasks (SRT). Our sample consisted of 8 children and 
adolescents who had undergone surgical removal of a benign posterior fossa tumor 
(PFT) during childhood. None of them had undergone chemotherapy or cranial 
radiation therapy (CRT). Ages ranged from 1-11 years at surgery and 9-17 years 
at testing. The children were tested not earlier than 2.5 years after surgery (M 
= 5.9 years), enabling brain plasticity and recovery of functions. Their 
performance was compared with a matched control sample. The PFT group was not 
impaired in the implicit learning of sequences, as reflected in their 
performance in blocks with a repeated sequence, both before and after a random 
block. However, in the perceptual task, their performance deteriorated more than 
that of the control group when a random block was introduced, suggesting that it 
was more difficult for the patients to respond flexibly or change their response 
set when encountering changing task demands. These results are in line with 
another study by our group on task switching with the same patients.

PMID: 16209429 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


467. Neuroimage. 2008 Jun;41(2):483-92. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2008.02.058. Epub 
2008 Mar 18.

Cortical mechanisms of retinal and extraretinal smooth pursuit eye movements to 
different target velocities.

Nagel M(1), Sprenger A, Hohagen F, Binkofski F, Lencer R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, University of Luebeck, 
Ratzeburger Allee 160, 23538 Luebeck, Germany. 
matthias.nagel@psychatrie.uk-sh.de

Smooth pursuit eye movements (SPEM) are used to maintain focus upon moving 
targets. The generation of SPEM velocity is controlled by retinal information 
and extraretinal signals. Although there is a wealth of studies investigating 
retinal and extraretinal SPEM control, the main questions regarding the cortical 
mechanisms involved in the processing of SPEM to different stimulus velocities 
are still unresolved. We applied an innovative event-related fMRI-design by 
presenting target ramps at different velocities (5, 10, 15, 20 degrees/s) with 
both continuous target presentation and intervals of target blanking. The 
stimulus parameters were integrated into the statistical model and eye movements 
were registered to confirm SPEM performance. Our results clearly demonstrate 
that in humans the oculomotor network (V5, frontal and supplementary eye fields, 
lateral intraparietal area) is engaged in the processing of retinal and 
extraretinal SPEM velocity. Within this network neural activity increases with 
increasing target velocity. During extraretinal SPEM, additional engagement of 
the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, angular gyrus, parahippocampal gyrus and 
superior temporal gyrus occurs. These regions encode cognitive functions such as 
memory, attention and monitoring. The activation of the inferior parietal cortex 
seems to be related to the interaction between velocity and blanking thereby 
underlining its relevance for task switching and sensorimotor transformation.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2008.02.058
PMID: 18420428 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


468. Neuropsychologia. 2014 Jan;53:171-7. doi: 
10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2013.11.015. Epub 2013 Nov 28.

Cognitive flexibility depends on white matter microstructure of the basal 
ganglia.

van Schouwenburg MR(1), Onnink AM(2), ter Huurne N(3), Kan CC(2), Zwiers MP(4), 
Hoogman M(5), Franke B(6), Buitelaar JK(7), Cools R(3).

Author information:
(1)Radboud University Medical Centre, Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and 
Behaviour, Department of Psychiatry, PO Box 9101, 6500 HB Nijmegen, The 
Netherlands; Radboud University Nijmegen, Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition 
and Behaviour, Centre for Cognitive Neuroimaging, PO Box 9104, 6500 HE Nijmegen, 
The Netherlands; Department of Neurology, University of California, San 
Francisco, CA 94158, USA. Electronic address: martine.vanschouwenburg@ucsf.edu.
(2)Radboud University Medical Centre, Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and 
Behaviour, Department of Psychiatry, PO Box 9101, 6500 HB Nijmegen, The 
Netherlands.
(3)Radboud University Medical Centre, Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and 
Behaviour, Department of Psychiatry, PO Box 9101, 6500 HB Nijmegen, The 
Netherlands; Radboud University Nijmegen, Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition 
and Behaviour, Centre for Cognitive Neuroimaging, PO Box 9104, 6500 HE Nijmegen, 
The Netherlands.
(4)Radboud University Nijmegen, Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and 
Behaviour, Centre for Cognitive Neuroimaging, PO Box 9104, 6500 HE Nijmegen, The 
Netherlands; Radboud University Medical Centre, Donders Institute for Brain, 
Cognition and Behaviour, Department of Cognitive Neuroscience, PO Box 9104, 6500 
HE Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(5)Radboud University Medical Centre, Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and 
Behaviour, Department of Psychiatry, PO Box 9101, 6500 HB Nijmegen, The 
Netherlands; Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics, Department of Language 
and Genetics, PO Box 310, 6500 AH Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(6)Radboud University Medical Centre, Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and 
Behaviour, Department of Psychiatry, PO Box 9101, 6500 HB Nijmegen, The 
Netherlands; Radboud University Medical Centre, Donders Institute for Brain, 
Cognition and Behaviour, Department of Human Genetics, PO Box 9101, 6500 HB 
Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(7)Radboud University Medical Centre, Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and 
Behaviour, Department of Cognitive Neuroscience, PO Box 9104, 6500 HE Nijmegen, 
The Netherlands.

Ample evidence shows that the basal ganglia play an important role in cognitive 
flexibility. However, traditionally, cognitive processes have most commonly been 
associated with the prefrontal cortex. Indeed, current theoretical models of 
basal ganglia function suggest the basal ganglia interact with the prefrontal 
cortex and thalamus, via anatomical fronto-striato-thalamic circuits, to 
implement cognitive flexibility. Here we aimed to assess this hypothesis in 
humans by associating individual differences in cognitive flexibility with white 
matter microstructure of the basal ganglia. To this end we employed an attention 
switching paradigm in adults with ADHD and controls, leading to a broad range in 
task performance. Attention switching performance could be predicted based on 
individual differences in white matter microstructure in/around the basal 
ganglia. Crucially, local white matter showing this association projected to 
regions in the prefrontal cortex and thalamus. Our findings highlight the 
crucial role of the basal ganglia and the fronto-striato-thalamic circuit for 
cognitive flexibility.

© 2013 Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2013.11.015
PMID: 24291339 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


469. Cortex. 2020 Jul;128:73-87. doi: 10.1016/j.cortex.2020.03.010. Epub 2020 Mar 31.

From correlational approaches to meta-analytical symptom reading in individual 
patients: Bilateral lesions in the inferior frontal junction specifically cause 
dysexecutive syndrome.

Schroeter ML(1), Eickhoff SB(2), Engel A(3).

Author information:
(1)Max Planck Institute for Human Cognitive and Brain Sciences, Leipzig, 
Germany; Clinic for Cognitive Neurology, University of Leipzig, Germany; German 
Consortium for Frontotemporal Lobar Degeneration, Ulm, Germany. Electronic 
address: schroet@cbs.mpg.de.
(2)Institute of Systems Neuroscience, Heinrich Heine University Düsseldorf, 
Germany & Institute of Neuroscience and Medicine (INM-7: Brain and Behavior), 
Research Centre Jülich, Germany. Electronic address: simon.b.eickhoff@gmail.com.
(3)Max Planck Institute for Human Cognitive and Brain Sciences, Leipzig, 
Germany; Clinic for Cognitive Neurology, University of Leipzig, Germany. 
Electronic address: annerose.engel@medizin.uni-leipzig.de.

BACKGROUND: Executive functions describe a wide variety of higher order 
cognitive processes allowing the modification of thought and behavior in 
response to changing contexts. Recent comprehensive quantitative and systematic 
meta-analyses on functional imaging studies in healthy subjects identified the 
inferior frontal junction (IFJ), located at the junction of the inferior frontal 
sulcus and the inferior precentral sulcus, as essential for executive functions. 
Lesion studies in patients are necessary for confirmation of this finding.
CASE PRESENTATION: We present, as a proof of concept, a 56 year old woman with 
bilateral ischemic lesions in the IFJ caused by multiple stroke-related brain 
infarcts in the bilateral territory of the middle cerebral artery. Comprehensive 
neuropsychological testing revealed specific deficits in executive functions, 
namely working memory, task switching, inhibitory control, interference 
resolution, fluency, and complex executive function tests focusing on action 
planning and problem solving abilities. Memory functions were within the normal 
range. Furthermore, we applied comprehensive meta-analyses to validate the 
importance of the IFJ for executive functions. (i) Lesions in the patient's 
brain in the IFJ coincide with regional activation in functional imaging studies 
for working memory, task switching, and the Stroop task. (ii) Lesions in the 
patient's IFJ should affect a frontoparietal network as shown with connectivity 
analyses. (iii) We introduce a new analysis tool - Meta-Analytical Reading of 
Symptoms (MARS) - that enables prediction of clinical symptoms from imaging data 
in individual patients.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study confirms the importance of the IFJ as the causal agent, 
in a frontoparietal network, for dysexecutive syndrome. As a lesion study, it 
goes beyond correlational imaging approaches. The new meta-analytical symptom 
reading approach can be applied in other patients and diseases. It has a high 
potential to foster individualized diagnosis and therapy in clinical settings in 
the framework of personalized medicine.

Copyright © 2020 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cortex.2020.03.010
PMID: 32320849 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


470. Hum Brain Mapp. 2009 Jan;30(1):299-311. doi: 10.1002/hbm.20501.

Neural activations at the junction of the inferior frontal sulcus and the 
inferior precentral sulcus: interindividual variability, reliability, and 
association with sulcal morphology.

Derrfuss J(1), Brass M, von Cramon DY, Lohmann G, Amunts K.

Author information:
(1)Medicine (INB3), Institute of Neurosciences and Biophysics - Medicine 
(INB-3), Research Center Juelich, Juelich, Germany. j.derrfuss@fz-juelich.de

The sulcal morphology of the human frontal lobe is highly variable. Although the 
structural images usually acquired in functional magnetic resonance imaging 
studies provide information about this interindividual variability, this 
information is only rarely used to relate structure and function. Here, we 
investigated the spatial relationship between posterior frontolateral 
activations in a task-switching paradigm and the junction of the inferior 
frontal sulcus and the inferior precentral sulcus (inferior frontal junction, 
IFJ) on an individual-subject basis. Results show that, although variable in 
terms of stereotaxic coordinates, the posterior frontolateral activations 
observed in task-switching are consistently and reliably located at the IFJ in 
the brains of individual participants. The IFJ shares such consistent 
localization with other nonprimary areas as motion-sensitive area V5/MT and the 
frontal eye field. Building on tension-based models of morphogenesis, this 
structure-function correspondence might indicate that the cytoarchitectonic area 
underlying activations of the IFJ develops at early stages of cortical folding.

(c) 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/hbm.20501
PMCID: PMC6870901
PMID: 18072280 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


471. Neuroimage. 2008 Jan 15;39(2):793-804. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2007.09.035. 
Epub 2007 Oct 31.

Isolation of saccade inhibition processes: rapid event-related fMRI of saccades 
and nogo trials.

Brown MR(1), Vilis T, Everling S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, University of Western Ontario, 
London, Ontario, Canada N6A 5C1. nrbrown23@gmail.com

Previous functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) studies have compared 
saccade trials and nogo trials, which required subjects to look at peripheral 
visual stimuli and to inhibit automatic saccades evoked by peripheral stimuli, 
respectively. These studies surprisingly reported no activation differences in 
cortical saccade regions between the two tasks, despite their opposite response 
requirements. Here, we re-examined this issue by comparing saccades and nogo 
trials using a rapid event-related fMRI design in which saccade trials were 
presented twice as frequently as nogo trials to make the saccade response more 
prepotent. We hypothesized that this should increase recruitment of response 
inhibition processes in the nogo task, thereby increasing fMRI activation on 
nogo trials. Saccade and nogo trials were presented in whole and half trial 
versions. Whereas whole trials included a trial type instruction followed by 
peripheral stimulus presentation and subject response, half trials included only 
the instruction component, allowing us to measure instruction-related activation 
separately from response-evoked signals for both saccades and nogo trials. 
Instruction-related activation was greater for nogo versus saccade trials in 
right frontal eye field, middle frontal gyrus, intraparietal sulcus, and 
precuneus, which we attribute to a mixture of preparatory and task switching 
processes. Response-related activation was greater for nogo trials in 
supplementary eye field, anterior cingulate cortex, inferior frontal gyrus, and 
right supramarginal gyrus, and we attribute these results to saccade inhibition 
and other processes associated with an increased requirement for inhibition of 
the automatic saccade in nogo trials.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2007.09.035
PMID: 17977025 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


472. Cereb Cortex. 2003 Apr;13(4):329-39. doi: 10.1093/cercor/13.4.329.

Dissociating the roles of the rostral anterior cingulate and the lateral 
prefrontal cortices in performing two tasks simultaneously or successively.

Dreher JC(1), Grafman J.

Author information:
(1)Cognitive Neuroscience Section, National Institute of Neurological Disorder 
and Stroke, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892-1440, USA.

A fundamental question about the nature of cognitive control is whether 
performing two tasks successively or simultaneously activates distinct brain 
regions. To investigate this question, we designed a functional magnetic 
resonance imaging (fMRI) study that compared task-switching and dual-task 
performance. The results showed that performing two tasks successively or 
simultaneously activated a common prefronto-parietal neural network relative to 
performing each task separately. More importantly, we found that the anterior 
cingulate and the lateral prefrontal cortices were differently activated in 
dual-task and task-switching situations. When performing two tasks 
simultaneously, as compared to performing them in succession, activation was 
found in the rostral anterior cingulate cortex. In contrast, switching between 
two tasks, relative to performing them simultaneously, activated the left 
lateral prefrontal cortex and the bilateral intra-parietal sulcus region. We 
interpret these results as indicating that the rostral anterior cingulate cortex 
serves to resolve conflicts between stimulus-response associations when 
performing two tasks simultaneously, while the lateral prefrontal cortex 
dynamically selects the neural pathways needed to perform a given task during 
task switching.

DOI: 10.1093/cercor/13.4.329
PMID: 12631562 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


473. Behav Brain Res. 2013 Aug 1;250:326-33. doi: 10.1016/j.bbr.2013.05.020. Epub 
2013 May 21.

Switching ability of over trained movements in a Parkinson's disease rat model.

Florio TM(1), Confalone G, Sciarra A, Sotgiu A, Alecci M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Life, Health and Environmental Sciences, University of 
L'Aquila, Via Vetoio, 67100 L'Aquila, Italy. tizianamarilena.florio@univaq.it

Patients with Parkinson's disease show unbalanced capability to manage 
self-paced vs externally driven movements, or automatic-associated movements 
with respect to the intended voluntary movements. We studied the effect of a 
selective loss of dopaminergic terminals within the striatum and the execution 
of a well-learned set-shifting task as revealed using tyrosine hydroxylase 
immunoreactivity and magnetic resonance imaging in the rat. We found that, both 
in the externally cued condition, and in the externally-internally driven 
switching task, the cue-dependent constraints interfered with motor readiness in 
over training condition. The unilateral dopaminergic striatal depletion enhanced 
the switch-induced performance differences in favour of the 
internally-externally cued transition. Dopamine depleted rats, in fact, were 
impaired to produce an alternative motion when task switching required to change 
from an over trained behaviour, towards an alternative self-paced response. The 
comparative analysis of behavioural, tyrosine hydroxylase immunoreactivity and 
magnetic resonance imaging data, revealed a shrinkage of the lesioned striatum, 
and an enlargement of the ipsilateral ventricle that could provide useful 
markers for monitoring pathological changes occurring during early stages of 
Parkinson's disease in vivo.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbr.2013.05.020
PMID: 23707247 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


474. J Cogn Neurosci. 2008 Feb;20(2):255-67. doi: 10.1162/jocn.2008.20015.

Fractionating the cognitive control required to bring about a change in task: a 
dense-sensor event-related potential study.

Astle DE(1), Jackson GM, Swainson R.

Author information:
(1)University of Nottingham, UK. duncan.astle@psy.ox.ac.uk

The ability to change our behavior is one that we frequently exert, although 
determining the mechanisms by which we do so is far from trivial. Task switching 
is a useful experimental paradigm for studying cognitive control functions. 
Switching between tasks is associated with a decrement in performance, or 
"switch-cost," relative to repeating the same task. We have previously 
demonstrated that this cost is dependent on switching from performing one task 
to performing another; changing only our intended performance does not elicit 
the same performance deficit. Using event-related potentials (ERPs), we 
dissociated two electrophysiological indices mirroring this behavioral 
distinction [Astle, D. E., Jackson, G. M., & Swainson, R. Dissociating neural 
indices of dynamic cognitive control in advance task-set preparation: An ERP 
study of task switching. Brain Res, 1125, 94-103, 2006]. However, what was 
unclear were the specific aspects of performance that were critical for 
triggering the neural mechanisms associated specifically with switching from a 
previously performed task. Two candidate aspects were: (i) that performance 
required a physical response and (ii) that the two tasks shared their responses 
(they had bivalent response mappings). The present study therefore compared 
three separate groups to explore the effects of these different aspects of 
performance. Each group completed the same basic task-switching paradigm, but 
with either an overt response or covert response, and either switching between 
tasks that shared their responses (bivalent response mappings) or had separate 
responses (univalent response mappings). When comparing precue-locked ERPs, we 
observed three separable components: one common to all three groups, one which 
primarily dissociated overt from covert responding, and one which primarily 
dissociated bivalent from univalent responding. We therefore concluded that 
changing our behavior engages at least three dissociable mechanisms. 
Interestingly, in the overt conditions, residual switch-costs were absent; in 
addition, therefore, we concluded that it is possible to engage cognitive 
control in advance, such that the new behavior is as efficient as were the 
subject to have repeated the old behavior.

DOI: 10.1162/jocn.2008.20015
PMID: 18275333 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


475. Neuroimage. 2003 Oct;20(2):1026-31. doi: 10.1016/S1053-8119(03)00357-4.

When the same response has different meanings: recoding the response meaning in 
the lateral prefrontal cortex.

Brass M(1), Ruge H, Meiran N, Rubin O, Koch I, Zysset S, Prinz W, von Cramon DY.

Author information:
(1)Max Planck Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience, Leipzig, Germany. 
brass@cns.mpg.de

The ability to adapt our behavioral repertoire to different situations and tasks 
is crucial for our behavioral control. Since the same motor behavior can have 
different meanings in different task situations, we often have to change the 
meaning of our responses when we get into a different task context. In a 
functional MRI experiment we manipulated this response recoding process. 
Subjects were required to execute two simple spatial tasks in a task switching 
paradigm. In one condition both tasks required the same set of responses, hence 
each response had two different meanings depending on the relevant task 
(bivalent condition). In the other condition subjects used a separate set of 
responses for each task (univalent condition). While subjects were required to 
recode the meaning when switching from one task to the next in the bivalent 
condition, response recoding was not required in the univalent condition. We 
demonstrate that the lateral prefrontal cortex is involved in recoding of 
response meaning. These results extend previous assumptions on the role of the 
prefrontal cortex in behavioral control.

DOI: 10.1016/S1053-8119(03)00357-4
PMID: 14568472 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


476. Cereb Cortex. 2014 Jun;24(6):1460-73. doi: 10.1093/cercor/bhs417. Epub 2013 Feb 
4.

I can't keep your face and voice out of my head: neural correlates of an 
attentional bias toward nonverbal emotional cues.

Jacob H(1), Brück C, Domin M, Lotze M, Wildgruber D.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, 
Germany and.

Emotional information can be conveyed by verbal and nonverbal cues with the 
latter often suggested to exert a greater influence in shaping our perceptions 
of others. The present functional magnetic resonance imaging study sought to 
explore attentional biases toward nonverbal signals by investigating the 
interaction of verbal and nonverbal cues. Results obtained in this study 
underline the previous suggestions of a "nonverbal dominance" in emotion 
communication by evidencing implicit effects of nonverbal cues on emotion 
judgements even when attention is directed away from nonverbal signals and 
focused on verbal cues. Attentional biases toward nonverbal signals appeared to 
be reflected in increasing activation of the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex 
(DLPFC) assumed to reflect increasing difficulties to suppress nonverbal cues 
during task conditions that asked to shift attention away from nonverbal 
signals. Aside the DLPFC, results suggest the right amygdala to play a role in 
attention control mechanisms related to the processing of emotional cues. 
Analyses conducted to determine the cerebral correlates of the individual 
ability to shift attention between verbal and nonverbal sources of information 
indicated that higher task-switching abilities seem to be associated with the 
up-regulation of right amygdala activation during explicit judgments of 
nonverbal cues, whereas difficulties in task-switching seem to be related to a 
down-regulation.

DOI: 10.1093/cercor/bhs417
PMID: 23382516 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


477. Neurorehabil Neural Repair. 2026 Feb 15:15459683251412284. doi: 
10.1177/15459683251412284. Online ahead of print.

Motor, Cognitive, Psychological, and Neural Predictors of Concern About Falling 
in Persons With Multiple Sclerosis.

Takla TN(1)(2)(3), Monaghan PG(1)(4), Abbawi MM(1)(2)(3), Landers MR(5), Marusak 
HA(2)(3)(6), Daugherty AM(2)(7)(8), Fritz NE(1)(2)(4)(9).

Author information:
(1)Neuroimaging and Neurorehabilitation Laboratory, Wayne State University, 
Detroit, MI, USA.
(2)Translational Neuroscience Program, Wayne State University, Detroit, MI, USA.
(3)Department of Psychiatry & Behavioral Neurosciences, School of Medicine, 
Wayne State University, Detroit, MI, USA.
(4)Department of Health Care Sciences, Wayne State University, Detroit, MI, USA.
(5)Department of Physical Therapy, University of Nevada, Las Vegas, NV, USA.
(6)Merrill Palmer Skillman Institute for Child and Family Development, Wayne 
State University, Detroit, MI, USA.
(7)Department of Psychology, Wayne State University, Detroit, MI, USA.
(8)Institute of Gerontology, Wayne State University, Detroit, MI, USA.
(9)Department of Neurology, Wayne State University, Detroit, MI, USA.

BackgroundConcern about falling (CAF) is highly prevalent in multiple sclerosis 
(MS) and is linked to poor motor, cognitive, and psychological functioning. 
Although CAF has been associated with impairments in these domains, the unique 
and combined contributions of motor, cognitive, psychological, and neural 
factors remain unclear. This study used a comprehensive approach to identify 
behavioral and neural predictors of CAF.MethodsForty-three individuals with MS 
completed motor, cognitive, and psychological assessments, and underwent a 
structural magnetic resonance imaging scan. Linear regression models examined 
domain-specific predictors of CAF, controlling for disease severity. A 
discriminant function analysis (DFA) evaluated the combined predictive value of 
all variables in classifying individuals into high versus low CAF groups based 
on a median split.ResultsCAF was significantly associated with impairments 
across all behavioral domains (|r| = .32-.78). Regression models explained 57% 
to 74% of variance in CAF. Greater physical fatigue (β = .46), slower backward 
walking speed (β = -.41), slower processing speed (β = -.44), impaired 
task-switching (β = .32), higher anxiety (β = .38), and avoidance behavior 
(β = .58) predicted greater CAF. Hippocampal and cerebellar volumes were not 
significant predictors after accounting for disease severity. DFA classified 
participants with high accuracy (73.9% low CAF; 65.0% high CAF).ConclusionCAF in 
MS reflects a complex interplay of physical, cognitive, and emotional factors. 
While structural brain measures were not independently predictive, the combined 
influence of motor, cognitive, and psychological factors highlight the need for 
multidomain assessments and treatments to reduce CAF and its negative 
consequences in MS.

DOI: 10.1177/15459683251412284
PMCID: PMC12912773
PMID: 41693088

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors declared no 
potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research, authorship, and/or 
publication of this article


478. J Nucl Med. 2000 May;41(5):926-33.

Enhancement of the signal-to-noise ratio in H2(15)O bolus PET activation images: 
a combined cold-bolus, switched protocol.

Moreno-Cantú JJ(1), Thompson CJ, Meyer E, Fiset P, Zatorre RJ, Klein D, Reutens 
DC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology and Neurosurgery, McConnell Brain Imaging Center, 
Montreal Neurological Institute, Quebec, Canada.

To increase the signal-to-noise ratio (S/N) of H2(15)O bolus PET activation 
images, we designed and tested a data acquisition protocol that alters the 
relative distribution of tracer in the uptake and washout phases of the input 
function. This protocol enhances the S/N gains obtained with conventional 
switched protocols by combining task switching and the use of a large bolus of 
blood free of tracer (cold bolus). The cold bolus is formed by sequestering 
blood in the lower limbs with a double cuff before tracer injection.
METHODS: The effect of a combined cold-bolus, switched protocol on the signal 
from activation images was first simulated using a compartmental model of the 
uptake of H2(15)O into the brain. Then, the effectiveness of the protocol was 
investigated in 4 healthy volunteers performing a language task. Each volunteer 
underwent scanning 12 times: 3 activation/ baseline and 3 baseline/activation 
scans using the conventional switched protocol and 3 activation/baseline and 3 
baseline/activation scans using the combined cold-bolus, switched protocol. The 
S/N changes introduced when using the cold bolus were analyzed by comparing, 
across protocols, the magnitude and statistical significance of the activation 
foci associated with the execution of the language task identified in the 
averaged subtracted images, and by comparing image noise levels.
RESULTS: In the simulated datasets, the combined protocol yielded a substantial 
increase in the activation signals for scan durations greater than 60 s, in 
comparison with equivalent signals yielded by the switched protocol alone. In 
the PET experiments, activation foci obtained using the combined protocol had 
significantly higher t statistic values than did equivalent foci detected using 
the conventional switched protocol (mean improvement, 36%). Analysis of the S/N 
in the averaged subtracted images revealed that the improvements in statistical 
significance of the activation foci were caused by increases in the signal 
magnitudes and not by decreases in overall image noise.
CONCLUSION: We designed a data acquisition protocol for H2(15)O bolus PET 
activation studies that combines the use of a tracer-free bolus with a switched 
protocol. Simulated and experimental data suggest that this combined protocol 
enhances the S/N gains obtained with a conventional switched protocol. 
Implementation of the combined protocol in H2(15)O bolus activation studies was 
easy.

PMID: 10809210 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


479. Neuroimage. 2008 Apr 15;40(3):1311-8. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2007.12.049. 
Epub 2008 Jan 10.

Anterior cingulate cortex signals the requirement to break inertia when 
switching tasks: a study of the bivalency effect.

Woodward TS(1), Metzak PD, Meier B, Holroyd CB.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada. 
toddswoodward@gmail.com

When switching tasks, if stimuli are presented that cue two of the tasks in the 
task set (i.e., bivalent stimuli), performance slowing is observed on all tasks, 
including those not cued by the bivalent stimulus. This slowing has been coined 
the bivalency effect, and may reflect adaptive tuning of the response style 
under conditions that appear to require adjustments in control over the course 
of action. Recent work on the function of the dorsal anterior cingulate (dACC) 
cortex has suggested that this neural region may be recruited under such 
conditions. In the current task switching study, we used tightly matched 
experimental and control conditions to isolate the bivalency effect. As 
predicted, dACC activation was associated with the bivalency effect, supporting 
an account stating that the role of the dACC is to signal a break in task 
inertia in order to adaptively tune the response style due to conditions that 
may require adjustments in control over the course of action. This result may 
extend the conflict monitoring account of dACC activation to situations where 
conflict occurred on past trials (i.e., conflict is not elicited by the current 
stimulus), and/or may support a more generalized account of dACC function 
involving monitoring internal states for conditions that may require adjustments 
in control over the course of action.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2007.12.049
PMID: 18291678 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


480. J Cogn Neurosci. 2017 Aug;29(8):1390-1401. doi: 10.1162/jocn_a_01130. Epub 2017 
Apr 7.

Parsing the Roles of the Frontal Lobes and Basal Ganglia in Task Control Using 
Multivoxel Pattern Analysis.

Kehagia AA(1), Ye R(1), Joyce DW(1), Doyle OM(1), Rowe JB(2)(3), Robbins TW(2).

Author information:
(1)King's College London.
(2)University of Cambridge.
(3)MRC Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit, Cambridge, UK.

Cognitive control has traditionally been associated with pFC based on 
observations of deficits in patients with frontal lesions. However, evidence 
from patients with Parkinson disease indicates that subcortical regions also 
contribute to control under certain conditions. We scanned 17 healthy volunteers 
while they performed a task-switching paradigm that previously dissociated 
performance deficits arising from frontal lesions in comparison with Parkinson 
disease, as a function of the abstraction of the rules that are switched. From a 
multivoxel pattern analysis by Gaussian Process Classification, we then 
estimated the forward (generative) model to infer regional patterns of activity 
that predict Switch/Repeat behavior between rule conditions. At 1000 
permutations, Switch/Repeat classification accuracy for concrete rules was 
significant in the BG, but at chance in the frontal lobe. The inverse pattern 
was obtained for abstract rules, whereby the conditions were successfully 
discriminated in the frontal lobe but not in the BG. This double dissociation 
highlights the difference between cortical and subcortical contributions to 
cognitive control and demonstrates the utility of multivariate approaches in 
investigations of functions that rely on distributed and overlapping neural 
substrates.

DOI: 10.1162/jocn_a_01130
PMCID: PMC5572622
PMID: 28387585 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: none declared.


481. Cereb Cortex. 2005 Jul;15(7):899-912. doi: 10.1093/cercor/bhh189. Epub 2004 Sep 
30.

Cognitive control involved in overcoming prepotent response tendencies and 
switching between tasks.

Barber AD(1), Carter CS.

Author information:
(1)University of Pittsburgh, Psychology, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA. 
adbarber@pitt.edu

A dissociable set of regions was active for the executive processing associated 
with overcoming a prepotent response tendency and task switching. Regions 
associated with overcoming prepotency were primarily frontal and may be part of 
a system involved in top-down biasing for conflict reduction. Posterior regions 
were recruited for switching between tasks and likely play a role in 
reconfiguring stimulus-response mappings. Precuneus activity was common to both 
manipulations and may reflect increased visual attention due to more difficult 
task demands.

DOI: 10.1093/cercor/bhh189
PMID: 15459082 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


482. PLoS One. 2017 Dec 20;12(12):e0187715. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0187715. 
eCollection 2017.

Improving resolution of dynamic communities in human brain networks through 
targeted node removal.

Schlesinger KJ(1), Turner BO(2), Grafton ST(2), Miller MB(2), Carlson JM(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physics, University of California Santa Barbara, Santa Barbara, 
California, United States of America.
(2)Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, University of California 
Santa Barbara, Santa Barbara, California, United States of America.

Current approaches to dynamic community detection in complex networks can fail 
to identify multi-scale community structure, or to resolve key features of 
community dynamics. We propose a targeted node removal technique to improve the 
resolution of community detection. Using synthetic oscillator networks with 
well-defined "ground truth" communities, we quantify the community detection 
performance of a common modularity maximization algorithm. We show that the 
performance of the algorithm on communities of a given size deteriorates when 
these communities are embedded in multi-scale networks with communities of 
different sizes, compared to the performance in a single-scale network. We 
demonstrate that targeted node removal during community detection improves 
performance on multi-scale networks, particularly when removing the most 
functionally cohesive nodes. Applying this approach to network neuroscience, we 
compare dynamic functional brain networks derived from fMRI data taken during 
both repetitive single-task and varied multi-task experiments. After the removal 
of regions in visual cortex, the most coherent functional brain area during the 
tasks, community detection is better able to resolve known functional brain 
systems into communities. In addition, node removal enables the algorithm to 
distinguish clear differences in brain network dynamics between these 
experiments, revealing task-switching behavior that was not identified with the 
visual regions present in the network. These results indicate that targeted node 
removal can improve spatial and temporal resolution in community detection, and 
they demonstrate a promising approach for comparison of network dynamics between 
neuroscientific data sets with different resolution parameters.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0187715
PMCID: PMC5737970
PMID: 29261662 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.


483. Brain Cogn. 2009 Apr;69(3):559-64. doi: 10.1016/j.bandc.2008.11.008. Epub 2009 
Jan 9.

Brain mechanisms associated with background monitoring of the environment for 
potentially significant sensory events.

Gruber O(1), Melcher T, Diekhof EK, Karch S, Falkai P, Goschke T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Georg August University, Goettingen, Germany. 
ogruber@gwdg.de

Background monitoring is a necessary prerequisite to detect unexpected changes 
in the environment, while being involved in a primary task. Here, we used fMRI 
to investigate the neural mechanisms that underlie adaptive goal-directed 
behavior in a cued task switching paradigm during real response conflict or, 
more generally, when expectations on the repetitive features of the environment 
were violated. Unexpected changes in sensory stimulus attributes in the 
currently unattended stimulus dimension thereby led to activations in a 
bilateral network comprising inferior lateral frontal, intraparietal, and 
posterior medial frontal brain regions, independent of whether these attributes 
elicited a factual response conflict or not. This fronto-parietal network may 
thus play an important role in adaptive responding to potentially significant 
events outside the current focus of attention.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bandc.2008.11.008
PMID: 19135767 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


484. J Magn Reson Imaging. 2003 Nov;18(5):599-607. doi: 10.1002/jmri.10397.

Event-related analysis for event types of fixed order and restricted spacing by 
temporal quantification of trial-averaged fMRI time courses.

Ruge H(1), Brass M, Lohmann G, von Cramon DY.

Author information:
(1)Max-Planck-Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience, Leipzig, Germany.

PURPOSE: To develop a method for event-related fMRI that allows rapidly 
presented event sequences to be analyzed, without requiring transitions of 
different event-types to be counterbalanced.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A cued task switching procedure was investigated with an 
experimental trial comprising a visual task cue that indicated how to process a 
subsequent visual target stimulus. Cue and target were either presented 
quasi-simultaneously, separated by a 100 msec cue-target-interval (CTI100), or 
the target presentation was delayed by 2000 msec (CTI2000). To characterize the 
trial-related BOLD-response in terms of its temporal relation to the underlying 
event structure, the pattern of onset latency differences and peak latency 
differences for CTI2000 minus CTI100 was evaluated. Independent estimates of 
onset latencies and peak latencies were determined for preprocessed 
trial-averaged time courses by jackknife resampling.
RESULTS: Validating results were obtained for two brain areas with known 
characteristics: the visual cortex (cue-locked plus target-locked activation) 
and the motor cortex (response-locked activation). Extending the analysis to 
prefrontal areas with a priori unknown characteristics differentiated between 
several meaningful temporal activation patterns.
CONCLUSION: The method yielded a fine-grained temporal description of 
trial-related BOLD-responses that could be successfully used for the 
event-related analysis of an experimental design that was highly restricted with 
respect to event order and event spacing.

Copyright 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/jmri.10397
PMID: 14579403 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


485. Neuropsychologia. 2009 Feb;47(3):916-27. doi: 
10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2009.01.001. Epub 2009 Jan 8.

Aging white matter and cognition: differential effects of regional variations in 
diffusion properties on memory, executive functions, and speed.

Kennedy KM(1), Raz N.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Gerontology, Wayne State University, Detroit, MI, USA.

Disruption of cerebral white matter has been proposed as an explanation for 
age-related cognitive declines. However, the role of specific regions in 
specific cognitive declines remains unclear. We used diffusion tensor imaging to 
examine the associations between regional microstructural integrity of the white 
matter and performance on age-sensitive cognitive tasks in a sample of healthy 
adults (N=52, age 19-81 years). White matter integrity was assessed by 
fractional anisotropy (FA) and apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) in multiple 
regions of interest (genu and splenium of corpus callosum, internal capsule 
limbs, prefrontal, temporal, superior/posterior parietal, occipital white 
matter) and related to processing speed, working memory, inhibition, task 
switching, and episodic memory. We found that age and regional white matter 
integrity differentially influenced cognitive performance. Age-related 
degradation in anterior brain areas was associated with decreased processing 
speed and poorer working memory, whereas reduced inhibition and greater task 
switching costs were linked to decline in posterior areas. Poorer episodic 
memory was associated with age-related differences in central white matter 
regions. The observed multiple dissociations among specific age-sensitive 
cognitive skills and their putative neuroanatomical substrates support the view 
that age-related cognitive declines are unlikely to stem from a single cause.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2009.01.001
PMCID: PMC2643310
PMID: 19166865 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure Statement The authors have no actual 
or potential conflicts of interest associated with this research.


486. Am J Geriatr Psychiatry. 2010 Nov;18(11):1017-25. doi: 
10.1097/JGP.0b013e3181d695f2.

Cognitive control in late-life depression: response inhibition deficits and 
dysfunction of the anterior cingulate cortex.

Katz R(1), De Sanctis P, Mahoney JR, Sehatpour P, Murphy CF, Gomez-Ramirez M, 
Alexopoulos GS, Foxe JJ.

Author information:
(1)Nathan S. Kline Institute for Psychiatric Research, Orangeburg, NY, USA.

OBJECTIVES: Geriatric depression is associated with frontolimbic functional 
deficits, and this frontal dysfunction may underlie the marked executive control 
deficits often seen in this population. The authors' goal was to assess the 
integrity of frontal cortical functioning in geriatric depression, while these 
individuals performed a standard cognitive control task. The N2 component of the 
event-related potential (ERP), an evoked response generated within the anterior 
cingulate cortex (ACC), is significantly enhanced when nondepressed individuals 
successfully inhibit a response, providing an excellent metric of frontal 
inhibitory function.
DESIGN: The authors used a variant of a demanding Go/NoGo task-switching 
paradigm that required participants to inhibit response execution during NoGo 
trials by overcoming a potent response tendency established by frequent Go 
trials.
PARTICIPANTS: The authors compared a cohort of depressed geriatric outpatients 
(N = 11) with a similarly aged group of nondepressed participants (N = 11).
MEASUREMENTS: Reaction times, accuracy, and high-density event-related potential 
recordings from a 64-channel electrode montage were obtained.
RESULTS: A significantly enhanced N2 to NoGo trials was observed in nondepressed 
elderly participants, with generators localized to the ACC. In contrast, this 
enhancement was strongly reduced in the depressed sample. Source analysis and 
topographic mapping pointed to a displacement of N2 generators toward more 
posterior areas of the middle frontal gyrus in depressed subjects.
CONCLUSIONS: Findings confirm previous reports of an inhibitory control deficit 
in depressed elderly who show significantly increased rates of commission errors 
(i.e., failures to inhibit responses on NoGo trials). Electrophysiologic data 
suggest underlying dysfunction in ACC as the basis for this deficit.

DOI: 10.1097/JGP.0b013e3181d695f2
PMCID: PMC3770530
PMID: 20808083 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest statement: All of the 
authors attest that there are no conflicts of interest, financial or otherwise, 
pertaining to the work presented in this manuscript. Professor Foxe takes full 
responsibility for the integrity of the data and attests that all authors had 
full access to the data in this study. Dr. Alexopoulos has received research 
grants by Forest Pharmaceuticals, Inc. and participated in scientific advisory 
board meetings of Forest Pharmaceuticals. He has given lectures supported by 
Forest, Cephalon, Bristol Meyers, Janssen, Pfizer, and Lilly and has received 
support by Comprehensive Neuroscience, Inc. for the development of treatment 
guidelines in late-life psychiatric disorders.


487. Atten Percept Psychophys. 2015 Nov;77(8):2653-68. doi: 
10.3758/s13414-015-0976-4.

Selection in spatial working memory is independent of perceptual selective 
attention, but they interact in a shared spatial priority map.

Hedge C(1)(2), Oberauer K(3), Leonards U(4).

Author information:
(1)School of Psychology, Cardiff University, Tower Build, Park Place, Cardiff, 
CF10 3AT, UK. hedgec@cardiff.ac.uk.
(2)School of Experimental Psychology, University of Bristol, Bristol, UK. 
hedgec@cardiff.ac.uk.
(3)Department of Psychology, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.
(4)School of Experimental Psychology, University of Bristol, Bristol, UK.

We examined the relationship between the attentional selection of perceptual 
information and of information in working memory (WM) through four experiments, 
using a spatial WM-updating task. Participants remembered the locations of two 
objects in a matrix and worked through a sequence of updating operations, each 
mentally shifting one dot to a new location according to an arrow cue. 
Repeatedly updating the same object in two successive steps is typically faster 
than switching to the other object; this object switch cost reflects the 
shifting of attention in WM. In Experiment 1, the arrows were presented in 
random peripheral locations, drawing perceptual attention away from the selected 
object in WM. This manipulation did not eliminate the object switch cost, 
indicating that the mechanisms of perceptual selection do not underlie selection 
in WM. Experiments 2a and 2b corroborated the independence of selection observed 
in Experiment 1, but showed a benefit to reaction times when the placement of 
the arrow cue was aligned with the locations of relevant objects in WM. 
Experiment 2c showed that the same benefit also occurs when participants are not 
able to mark an updating location through eye fixations. Together, these data 
can be accounted for by a framework in which perceptual selection and selection 
in WM are separate mechanisms that interact through a shared spatial priority 
map.

DOI: 10.3758/s13414-015-0976-4
PMCID: PMC4644201
PMID: 26341873 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


488. Neuroimage. 2001 Jul;14(1 Pt 1):244-51. doi: 10.1006/nimg.2001.0797.

Effects of acoustic gradient noise from functional magnetic resonance imaging on 
auditory processing as reflected by event-related brain potentials.

Novitski N(1), Alho K, Korzyukov O, Carlson S, Martinkauppi S, Escera C, Rinne 
T, Aronen HJ, Näätänen R.

Author information:
(1)Cognitive Brain Research Unit, Department of Psychology, University of 
Helsinki, Finland.

The processing of sound changes and involuntary attention to them has been 
widely studied with event-related brain potentials (ERPs). Recently, functional 
magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) has been applied to determine the neural 
mechanisms of involuntary attention and the sources of the corresponding ERP 
components. The gradient-coil switching noise from the MRI scanner, however, is 
a challenge to any experimental design using auditory stimuli. In the present 
study, the effects of MRI noise on ERPs associated with preattentive processing 
of sound changes and involuntary switching of attention to them were 
investigated. Auditory stimuli consisted of frequently presented "standard" 
sounds, infrequent, slightly higher "deviant" sounds, and infrequent natural 
"novel" sounds. The standard and deviant sounds were either sinusoidal tones or 
musical chords, in separate stimulus sequences. The mismatch negativity (MMN) 
ERP associated with preattentive sound change detection was elicited by the 
deviant and novel sounds and was not affected by the prerecorded background MRI 
noise (in comparison with the condition with no background noise). The 
succeeding positive P3a ERP responses associated with involuntary attention 
switching elicited by novel sounds were also not affected by the MRI noise. 
However, in ERPs to standard tones and chords, the P1, N1, and P2 peak latencies 
were significantly prolonged by the MRI noise. Moreover, the amplitude of the 
subsequent "exogenous" N2 to the standard sounds was significantly attenuated by 
the presence of MRI noise. In conclusion, the present results suggest that in 
fMRI the background noise does not interfere with the imaging of auditory 
processing related to involuntary attention.

DOI: 10.1006/nimg.2001.0797
PMID: 11525334 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


489. Neuropsychologia. 2013 Apr;51(5):886-92. doi: 
10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2013.01.025. Epub 2013 Feb 5.

Episodic context binding in task switching: evidence from amnesia.

Meier B(1), Rey-Mermet A, Woodward TS, Müri R, Gutbrod K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Bern, Switzerland; Center for 
Cognition, Learning & Memory, University of Bern, Switzerland. 
beat.meier@psy.unibe.ch

The purpose of the present study was to investigate whether amnesic patients 
show a bivalency effect. The bivalency effect refers to the performance slowing 
that occurs when switching tasks and bivalent stimuli appear occasionally among 
univalent stimuli. According to the episodic context binding account, bivalent 
stimuli create a conflict-loaded context that is re-activated on subsequent 
trials and thus it is assumed that it depends on memory binding processes. Given 
the profound memory deficit in amnesia, we hypothesized that the bivalency 
effect would be largely reduced in amnesic patients. We tested sixteen severely 
amnesic patients and a control group with a paradigm requiring predictable 
alternations between three simple cognitive tasks, with bivalent stimuli 
occasionally occurring on one of these tasks. The results showed the typical 
bivalency effect for the control group, that is, a generalized slowing for each 
task. In contrast, for amnesic patients, only a short-lived slowing was present 
on the task that followed immediately after a bivalent stimulus, indicating that 
the binding between tasks and context was impaired in amnesic patients.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2013.01.025
PMID: 23395937 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


490. Cereb Cortex. 2011 Feb;21(2):245-53. doi: 10.1093/cercor/bhq057. Epub 2010 Jun 
3.

Saccadic preparation in the frontal eye field is modulated by distinct trial 
history effects as revealed by magnetoencephalography.

Lee AK(1), Hämäläinen MS, Dyckman KA, Barton JJ, Manoach DS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, MA 02215, USA.

Optimizing outcomes involves rapidly and continuously adjusting behavior based 
on context. While most behavioral studies focus on immediate task conditions, 
responses to events are also influenced by recent history. We used 
magnetoencephalography and a saccadic paradigm to investigate the neural bases 
of 2 trial history effects that are well characterized in the behavioral eye 
movement literature: task-switching and the prior-antisaccade effect. We found 
that switched trials were associated with increased errors and transient 
increases in activity in the frontal eye field (FEF) and anterior cingulate 
cortex early in the preparatory period. These activity changes are consistent 
with active reconfiguration of the task set, a time-limited process that is 
triggered by the instructional cue. Following an antisaccade versus prosaccade, 
there was increased activity in the FEF and prefrontal cortex that persisted 
into the preparatory period of the subsequent trial, and saccadic latencies were 
prolonged. We attribute these effects to persistent inhibition of the ocular 
motor response system from the prior antisaccade. These findings refine our 
understanding of how trial history interacts with current task demands to adjust 
responses. Such dynamic modulations of neural activity and behavior by recent 
experience are at the heart of adaptive flexible behavior.

DOI: 10.1093/cercor/bhq057
PMCID: PMC3020577
PMID: 20522539 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


491. Brain Res. 2010 Sep 10;1351:212-221. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2010.06.056. Epub 
2010 Jul 1.

A neural system for evaluating the behavioural relevance of salient events 
outside the current focus of attention.

Gruber O(1), Diekhof EK(2), Kirchenbauer L(2), Goschke T(3).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Translational Research in Systems Neuroscience and Clinical 
Psychiatry, Department of Psychiatry, Georg August University, Goettingen, 
Germany; Max Planck Institute for Human Cognitive and Brain Sciences, Leipzig, 
Germany. Electronic address: ogruber@gwdg.de.
(2)Centre for Translational Research in Systems Neuroscience and Clinical 
Psychiatry, Department of Psychiatry, Georg August University, Goettingen, 
Germany.
(3)Max Planck Institute for Human Cognitive and Brain Sciences, Leipzig, 
Germany; Department of Psychology, Technische Universität Dresden, Germany.

Adaptive behaviour requires that organisms continuously monitor the environment 
for potentially significant information and evaluate whether currently 
unattended stimuli afford a behavioural change. Here we used event-related 
functional magnetic resonance imaging in humans to assess the neural mechanisms 
underlying the evaluation of and rapid behavioural adjustments to salient 
stimuli occurring outside the current focus of (feature) attention. While 
subjects performed a task-switching paradigm in which they had to respond to 
either the colour or the shape of visual stimuli, occasionally deviant stimuli 
were presented that differed from the remaining stimuli with respect to the 
currently unattended feature. By systematically varying the frequency and the 
behavioural relevance of these perceptual deviations, we obtained a 
context-sensitive modulation of neural activity in a frontoparietal network 
including the posterior orbitofrontal cortex, the anterior cingulate cortex and 
the temporoparietal junction area, which may underlie a specific role in the 
adaptive guidance of behaviour in a changing environment. Together these brain 
regions may ensure that the relevance of a sudden environmental change is 
rapidly evaluated and implemented in appropriate action selection.

2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.brainres.2010.06.056
PMID: 20599810 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


492. BMC Psychiatry. 2012 May 20;12:45. doi: 10.1186/1471-244X-12-45.

Correlating anterior insula gray matter volume changes in young people with 
clinical and neurocognitive outcomes: an MRI study.

Hatton SN(1), Lagopoulos J, Hermens DF, Naismith SL, Bennett MR, Hickie IB.

Author information:
(1)Clinical Research Unit, Brain & Mind Research Institute, University of 
Sydney, Sydney, NSW, Australia. sean.hatton@sydney.edu.au

BACKGROUND: The anterior insula cortex is considered to be both the structural 
and functional link between experience, affect, and behaviour. Magnetic 
resonance imaging (MRI) studies have shown changes in anterior insula gray 
matter volume (GMV) in psychosis, bipolar, depression and anxiety disorders in 
older patients, but few studies have investigated insula GMV changes in young 
people. This study examined the relationship between anterior insula GMV, 
clinical symptom severity and neuropsychological performance in a heterogeneous 
cohort of young people presenting for mental health care.
METHODS: Participants with a primary diagnosis of depression (n = 43), bipolar 
disorder (n = 38), psychosis (n = 32), anxiety disorder (n = 12) or healthy 
controls (n = 39) underwent structural MRI scanning, and volumetric segmentation 
of the bilateral anterior insula cortex was performed using the FreeSurfer 
application. Statistical analysis examined the linear and quadratic correlations 
between anterior insula GMV and participants' performance in a battery of 
clinical and neuropsychological assessments.
RESULTS: Compared to healthy participants, patients had significantly reduced 
GMV in the left anterior insula (t = 2.05, p = .042) which correlated with 
reduced performance on a neuropsychological task of attentional set-shifting 
(ρ = .32, p = .016). Changes in right anterior insula GMV was correlated with 
increased symptom severity (r = .29, p = .006) and more positive symptoms 
(r = .32, p = .002).
CONCLUSIONS: By using the novel approach of examining a heterogeneous cohort of 
young depression, anxiety, bipolar and psychosis patients together, this study 
has demonstrated that insula GMV changes are associated with neurocognitive 
deficits and clinical symptoms in such young patients.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-244X-12-45
PMCID: PMC3468394
PMID: 22607202 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


493. Brain Res. 2009 May 13;1270:95-106. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2009.03.015. Epub 
2009 Mar 21.

The influence of mental fatigue and motivation on neural network dynamics; an 
EEG coherence study.

Lorist MM(1), Bezdan E, ten Caat M, Span MM, Roerdink JB, Maurits NM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental and Work Psychology, University of Groningen, 
Grote Kruisstraat 2/1, Groningen 9712 TS, The Netherlands. m.m.lorist@rug.nl

The purpose of the present study is to examine the effects of mental fatigue and 
motivation on neural network dynamics activated during task switching. Mental 
fatigue was induced by 2 h of continuous performance; after which subjects were 
motivated by using social comparison and monetary reward as motivating factors 
to perform well for an additional 20 min. EEG coherence was used as a measure of 
synchronization of brain activity. Electrodes of interest were identified using 
a data-driven pre-processing method (ten Caat, M., Lorist, M.M., Bezdan, E., 
Roerdink, J.B.T.M., Maurits, N.M., 2008a. High-density EEG coherence analysis 
using functional units applied to mental fatigue. J. Neurosci. Meth. 171, 
271-278; ten Caat, M., Maurits, N.M. and Roerdink, J.B.T.M., 2008b. Data-driven 
visualization and group analysis of multichannel EEG coherence with functional 
units. IEEE T. Vis. Comp. Gr. 14, 756-771). Performance on repetition trials was 
faster and more accurate than on switch trials. EEG data revealed more 
pronounced, frequency specific fronto-parietal network activation in switch 
trials, while power density was higher in repetition trials. The effects of 
mental fatigue on power and coherence were widespread, and not limited to 
specific frequency bands. Moreover, these effects were independent of specific 
task manipulations. This increase in neuronal activity and stronger 
synchronization between neural networks did not result in more efficient 
performance; response speed decreased and the number of errors increased in 
fatigued subjects. A modulation of the dopamine system is proposed as a common 
mechanism underlying the observed the fatigue effects.

DOI: 10.1016/j.brainres.2009.03.015
PMID: 19306850 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


494. Neuropsychologia. 2014 May;57:166-78. doi: 
10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2014.03.008. Epub 2014 Mar 28.

Support for a history-dependent predictive model of dACC activity in producing 
the bivalency effect: an event-related potential study.

Grundy JG(1), Shedden JM(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Neuroscience & Behaviour, McMaster University, 1280 
Main Street West, Hamilton, ON, Canada L8S 4K1. Electronic address: 
jggrundy@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Psychology, Neuroscience & Behaviour, McMaster University, 1280 
Main Street West, Hamilton, ON, Canada L8S 4K1.

In the present study, we examine electrophysiological correlates of factors 
influencing an adjustment in cognitive control known as the bivalency effect. 
During task-switching, the occasional presence of bivalent stimuli in a block of 
univalent trials is enough to elicit a response slowing on all subsequent 
univalent trials. Bivalent stimuli can be congruent or incongruent with respect 
to the response afforded by the irrelevant stimulus feature. Here we show that 
the incongruent bivalency effect, the congruent bivalency effect, and an effect 
of a simple violation of expectancy are captured at a frontal ERP component 
(between 300 and 550ms) associated with ACC activity, and that the 
unexpectedness effect is distinguished from both congruent and incongruent 
bivalency effects at an earlier component (100-120ms) associated with the 
temporal parietal junction. We suggest that the frontal component reflects the 
dACC's role in predicting future cognitive load based on recent history. In 
contrast, the posterior component may index early visual feature extraction in 
response to bivalent stimuli that cue currently ongoing tasks; dACC activity may 
trigger the temporal parietal activity only when specific task cueing is 
involved and not for simple violations of expectancy.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2014.03.008
PMID: 24686093 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


495. Behav Neurosci. 2000 Feb;114(1):3-17. doi: 10.1037//0735-7044.114.1.3.

The effect of dopamine depletion from the caudate nucleus of the common marmoset 
(Callithrix jacchus) on tests of prefrontal cognitive function.

Collins P(1), Wilkinson LS, Everitt BJ, Robbins TW, Roberts AC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental Psychology, University of Cambridge, United 
Kingdom.

This study examined the effects of depletion of dopamine from the caudate 
nucleus of the common marmoset (Callithrix jacchus), on tasks sensitive to 
prefrontal damage (attentional set-shifting and spatial delayed response). There 
was a marked impairment in performance on the spatial delayed response task, but 
performance on the attentional set-shifting task was relatively preserved except 
for an impairment in re-engagement of a previously relevant perceptual 
dimension. This pattern of impairment is distinct from that seen after 
excitotoxic lesions of the prefrontal cortex and in patients with Parkinson's 
disease. Though it is not possible to identify specific cognitive functions that 
are independent of dopaminergic modulation of the caudate nucleus, due to the 
partial nature of the lesion, the results do provide insight into those 
cognitive processes that appear most dependent on caudate dopamine.

DOI: 10.1037//0735-7044.114.1.3
PMID: 10718258 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


496. Sheng Wu Yi Xue Gong Cheng Xue Za Zhi. 2012 Oct;29(5):933-40.

[Brain electrical source analysis of the response to visual target and 
distractor stimuli].

[Article in Chinese]

Li Y(1), Hu Y, Ren L, Sun Z.

Author information:
(1)College of Mechatronics and Control Engineering, Shenzhen University, 
Shenzhen 518060, China. yuezhili@sina.com

In this paper, time courses of discrete cortical current sources evoked by 
target and distractor stimulus are presented in a visual three-stimulus oddball 
paradigm. 64-channel electroencephalogram (EEG) signals were recorded in healthy 
subjects in the paradigm where the P3b component of the P300 is evoked in the 
detection of rare events (target and distractor) and the P3a component is mainly 
produced by distractor events. A regional source model with constraints of 
spatial coordinates from fMRI was then applied to event-related potentials 
(ERPs) data in the target and distractor conditions. Activities of regional 
sources indicated bilateral inferior parietal lobe, posterior parietal cortex 
and inferior temporal cortex mainly contribute to the P3b, while the P3a was 
mainly produced by bilateral insula, bilateral precentral sulcus and cingulate 
gyrus. Target processing involved parietal lobe, inferior temporal cortex and 
left insula engaged in stimulus-driven attention process, goal-directed 
attention process, categorization of visual stimuli and memory retrieval, while 
distractor processing involved right insula and cingulate gyrus engaged in 
attention switching and reengagement of attention resource.

PMID: 23198438 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


497. Cereb Cortex. 2005 May;15(5):545-51. doi: 10.1093/cercor/bhh155. Epub 2004 Sep 
1.

The neural circuitry of pre-attentive auditory change-detection: an fMRI study 
of pitch and duration mismatch negativity generators.

Molholm S(1), Martinez A, Ritter W, Javitt DC, Foxe JJ.

Author information:
(1)The Cognitive Neurophysiology Laboratory, Program in Cognitive Neuroscience 
and Schizophrenia, Nathan Kline Institute for Psychiatric Research, 140 Old 
Orangeburg Road, Orangeburg, NY 10962, USA. molholm@nki.rfmh.org

Electrophysiological studies have revealed a pre-attentive change-detection 
system in the auditory modality. This system emits a signal termed the mismatch 
negativity (MMN) when any detectable change in a regular pattern of auditory 
stimulation occurs. The precise intracranial sources underlying MMN generation, 
and in particular whether these vary as a function of the acoustic feature that 
changes, is a matter of some debate. Using functional magnetic resonance 
imaging, we show that anatomically distinct networks of auditory cortices are 
activated as a function of the deviating acoustic feature--in this case, tone 
frequency and tone duration--strongly supporting the hypothesis that MMN 
generators in auditory cortex are feature dependent. We also detail regions of 
the frontal and parietal cortices activated by change-detection processes. These 
regions also show feature dependence and we hypothesize that they reflect 
recruitment of attention-switching mechanisms.

DOI: 10.1093/cercor/bhh155
PMID: 15342438 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


498. Percept Mot Skills. 2001 Jun;92(3 Pt 2):1205-10. doi: 
10.2466/pms.2001.92.3c.1205.

Relationship between discrimination tasks of the cantab and the corpus callosum 
morphology in Alzheimer's disease.

Dorion AA(1), Duyme M, Zanca M, Dubois B, Beau J.

Author information:
(1)Laboratoire de Génétique, Environnement, Développement et Comportement, 
Université Paris V, Poissy, France. agnesdorion@oreka.com

The relationship between performances on a simple discrimination task of the 
Attentional Set Shifting of the Cambridge Neuropsychological Test Auto mated 
Battery (CANTAB) and morphometry of the corpus callosum is examined in patients 
with Alzheimer's disease. Analysis showed patients with probable Alzheimer's 
disease are heterogeneous for the relationship between performances in the 
attentional test of the CANTAB and the anterior callosal atrophies. Interest in 
these results for clinical diagnosis of this mental disease is discussed.

DOI: 10.2466/pms.2001.92.3c.1205
PMID: 11565930 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


499. Front Psychiatry. 2025 Mar 6;16:1479283. doi: 10.3389/fpsyt.2025.1479283. 
eCollection 2025.

Initial evidence for neural correlates following a therapeutic intervention: 
altered resting state functional connectivity in the default mode network 
following attention training technique.

Müller T(#)(1), Krug S(#)(1), Kayali Ö(1), Leichter E(1), Jahn N(1), Winter 
L(1), Krüger THC(1)(2)(3), Kahl KG(1), Sinke C(#)(1)(2), Heitland I(#)(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Social Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, Hannover 
Medical School, Hanover, Germany.
(2)Division of Clinical Psychology and Sexual Medicine, Department of 
Psychiatry, Social Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, Hannover Medical School, 
Hanover, Germany.
(3)Center for Systems Neuroscience Hannover, Hanover, Germany.
(#)Contributed equally

INTRODUCTION: The Attention Training Technique (ATT) is a psychotherapeutic 
intervention in Metacogntive Therapy (MCT) and aims at reducing maladaptive 
processes by strengthening attentional flexibility. ATT has demonstrated 
efficacy in treating depression on a clinical level. Here, we evaluated ATT at 
the neural level. We examined functional connectivity (FC) of the default mode 
network (DMN).
METHOD: 48 individuals diagnosed with Major Depressive Disorder (MDD) and 51 
healthy controls (HC) participated in a resting-state (rs) functional magnetic 
resonance imaging (fMRI) experiment. The participants received either one week 
of ATT or a sham intervention. Rs-fMRI scans before and after treatment were 
compared using seed-to-voxel analysis.
RESULTS: The 2x2x2 analysis did not reach significance. Nevertheless, a 
resting-state connectivity effect was found on the basis of a posttest at the 
second measurement time point in MDD. After one week, MDD patients who had 
received ATT intervention presented lower functional connectivity between the 
left posterior cingulate cortex (PCC) and the bilateral middle frontal gyrus 
(MFG) as well as between the right PCC and the left MFG compared to the MDD 
patients in the sham group. In HC we observed higher rsFC in spatially close but 
not the same brain regions under the same experimental condition.
CONCLUSION: We found a first hint of a change at the neural level on the basis 
of ATT. Whether the changes in rsFC found here indicate an improvement in the 
flexible shift of attentional focus due to ATT needs to be investigated in 
further research paradigms. Further experiments have to show whether this change 
in functional connectivity can be used as a specific outcome measure of ATT 
treatment.

Copyright © 2025 Müller, Krug, Kayali, Leichter, Jahn, Winter, Krüger, Kahl, 
Sinke and Heitland.

DOI: 10.3389/fpsyt.2025.1479283
PMCID: PMC11922856
PMID: 40115647

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.


500. Brain Res Cogn Brain Res. 2002 Apr;13(2):267-79. doi: 
10.1016/s0926-6410(01)00132-x.

Lateral prefrontal damage affects processing selection but not attention 
switching.

Gehring WJ(1), Knight RT.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Michigan, 525 East University Avenue, 
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1109, USA. wgehring@umich.edu

A challenge for cognitive neuroscience is to determine how the prefrontal cortex 
(PFC) contributes to the cognitive control operations that oversee thought and 
action. We studied the effects of damage to the lateral PFC in two types of 
attentional control. Subjects performed a choice reaction time task that 
required attention switching and processing selection. The performance of 
individuals with PFC or parietal cortex damage was compared with that of 
age-matched and young control subjects. Damage to the lateral PFC did not 
significantly impair the switch from attending to one color to attending to 
another. PFC damage did, however, significantly increase the effects of 
distractor stimuli, implicating the lateral PFC in processing selection. 
Individual subjects' performance suggested that the left inferior posterior PFC 
was the most critical for processing selection. Our data are consistent with the 
view that the lateral PFC contributes to the top-down control of the information 
flow along pathways from sensory input to motor output.

Copyright 2002 Elsevier Science B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/s0926-6410(01)00132-x
PMID: 11958971 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


501. Neuroimage. 2014 Oct 1;99:357-64. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2014.05.047. Epub 
2014 May 23.

Dopamine release in nucleus accumbens during rewarded task switching measured by 
[¹¹C]raclopride.

Jonasson LS(1), Axelsson J(2), Riklund K(3), Braver TS(4), Ögren M(2), Bäckman 
L(5), Nyberg L(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiation Sciences, Umeå University, SE-901 87 Umeå, Sweden; 
Umeå Center for Functional Brain Imaging (UFBI), Umeå University, SE-901 87 
Umeå, Sweden; Centre for Population Studies, Ageing and Living Conditions, Umeå 
University, SE-901 87 Umeå, Sweden. Electronic address: 
lars.jonasson@diagrad.umu.se.
(2)Department of Radiation Sciences, Umeå University, SE-901 87 Umeå, Sweden.
(3)Department of Radiation Sciences, Umeå University, SE-901 87 Umeå, Sweden; 
Umeå Center for Functional Brain Imaging (UFBI), Umeå University, SE-901 87 
Umeå, Sweden.
(4)Department of Psychology, Washington University, St Louis, MO 63130, USA.
(5)Aging Research Center, Karolinska Institute, SE-113 30 Stockholm, Sweden.
(6)Department of Radiation Sciences, Umeå University, SE-901 87 Umeå, Sweden; 
Umeå Center for Functional Brain Imaging (UFBI), Umeå University, SE-901 87 
Umeå, Sweden; Department of Integrative Medical Biology, Physiology, Umeå 
University, SE-901 87 Umeå, Sweden.

Reward and motivation have positive influences on cognitive-control processes in 
numerous settings. Models of reward implicate corticostriatal loops and the 
dopamine (DA) system, with special emphasis on D2 receptors in nucleus accumbens 
(NAcc). In this study, 11 right-handed males (35-40 years) were scanned with 
positron emission tomography (PET) in a single [(11)C]raclopride dynamic scan 
during rewarded and non-rewarded task switching. Rewarded task switching 
(relative to baseline task switching) decreased [(11)C]raclopride binding in 
NAcc. Decreasing NAcc [(11)C]raclopride binding was strongly associated with 
task reaction time measures that reflect individual differences in effort and 
control strategies. Voxelwise analyses additionally revealed reward-related DA 
release in anterodorsal caudate, a region previously associated with 
task-switching. These PET findings provide evidence for striatal DA release 
during motivated cognitive control, and further suggest that NAcc DA release 
predicts the task reaction time benefits of reward incentives.

Copyright © 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2014.05.047
PMID: 24862078 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


502. Cogn Affect Behav Neurosci. 2020 Apr;20(2):309-325. doi: 
10.3758/s13415-020-00770-z.

Math anxiety and executive function: Neural influences of task switching on 
arithmetic processing.

Pizzie RG(1)(2), Raman N(3)(4), Kraemer DJM(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Georgetown University, White Gravenor Hall, 37th 
and O Streets, Washington, DC, 20007, USA. Rachel.pizzie@georgetown.edu.
(2)Department of Education and Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, 
Dartmouth College, Hanover, NH, USA. Rachel.pizzie@georgetown.edu.
(3)Department of Education and Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, 
Dartmouth College, Hanover, NH, USA.
(4)University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, PA, USA.

Math anxiety (MA) is associated with negative thoughts and emotions when 
encountering mathematics, often resulting in under-performance on math tasks. 
One hypothesized mechanism by which MA affects performance is through 
anxiety-related increases in working memory (WM) load, diverting resources away 
from mathematical computations. We examined whether this effect is specific to 
WM or whether the impact of MA extends to an overall depletion of executive 
function (EF) resources. In this fMRI experiment, we manipulated two separate 
factors known to impact EF demands-task-switching (TS) and increased WM load-in 
order to evaluate how MA relates to behavioral performance and neural activity 
related to mathematical calculations. Relative to a difficult non-math task 
(analogies), we observed MA-related deficits in math performance and reduced 
neural activity in a network of regions in the brain associated with arithmetic 
processing. In response to TS demands, higher levels of math anxiety were 
associated with a pattern of avoidance and disengagement. When switching from 
the control task, high math anxiety (HMA) was associated with disengagement from 
math trials, speeding through these trials, and exhibiting reduced neural 
activity in regions associated with arithmetic processing. The effects of math 
anxiety and WM were most pronounced at the lowest levels of WM load. Overall, 
the results of this study indicate that the effects of MA are broader than 
previously demonstrated and provide further insight into how EF deficits in MA 
might impact recruitment of neural resources that are important for successful 
math computations.

DOI: 10.3758/s13415-020-00770-z
PMID: 32112298 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


503. Front Psychol. 2013 Oct 16;4:731. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2013.00731. eCollection 
2013.

The beneficial effects of meditation: contribution of the anterior cingulate and 
locus coeruleus.

Craigmyle NA(1).

Author information:
(1)Gurdjieff Foundation of California San Francisco, CA, USA.

During functional magnetic resonance imaging studies of meditation the cortical 
salience detecting and executive networks become active during "awareness of 
mind wandering," "shifting," and "sustained attention." The anterior cingulate 
(AC) is activated during "awareness of mind wandering." The AC modulates both 
the peripheral sympathetic nervous system (SNS) and the central locus coeruleus 
(LC) norepinephrine systems, which form the principal neuromodulatory system, 
regulating in multiple ways both neuronal and non-neuronal cells to maximize 
adaptation in changing environments. The LC is the primary source of central 
norepinephrine (C-NE) and nearly the exclusive source of cortical 
norepinephrine. Normally activated by novel or salient stimuli, the AC initially 
inhibits the SNS reflexively, lowering peripheral norepinephrine and activates 
the LC, increasing C-NE. Moderate levels of C-NE enhance working memory through 
alpha 2 adrenergic receptors, while higher levels of C-NE, acting on alpha 1 and 
beta receptors, enhance other executive network functions such as the stopping 
of ongoing behavior, attentional set-shifting, and sustained attention. The 
actions of the AC on both the central and peripheral noradrenergic systems are 
implicated in the beneficial effects of meditation. This paper will explore some 
of the known functions and interrelationships of the AC, SNS, and LC with 
respect to their possible relevance to meditation.

DOI: 10.3389/fpsyg.2013.00731
PMCID: PMC3797386
PMID: 24137145


504. Cereb Cortex. 2000 Jun;10(6):585-92. doi: 10.1093/cercor/10.6.585.

A parametric manipulation of central executive functioning.

Garavan H(1), Ross TJ, Li SJ, Stein EA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Biophysics Research Institute, Medical College 
of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI, USA. hugh.garavan@tcd.ie

The central executive is both an important and poorly understood construct that 
is invoked in current theoretical models of human cognition and in various 
dysexecutive clinical syndromes. We report a task designed to isolate one 
elementary executive function, namely the allocation of attentional resources 
within working memory. The frequency with which attention was switched between 
items in working memory was varied across different trials, while storage and 
rehearsal demands were held constant. Functional magnetic resonance imaging 
revealed widespread areas, both prefrontal and more posterior, that 
differentially activated as a function of a trial's executive demands. 
Furthermore, areas that differed as a function of executive demands tended to 
lie adjacent to areas that were activated during the task but that did not so 
differ. Together, these data suggest that a distributed neuroanatomy, rather 
than a specific and unique locus, underlies this attention switching executive 
function.

DOI: 10.1093/cercor/10.6.585
PMID: 10859136 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


505. Curr Opin Neurobiol. 2010 Apr;20(2):199-204. doi: 10.1016/j.conb.2010.01.007. 
Epub 2010 Feb 16.

Learning and cognitive flexibility: frontostriatal function and monoaminergic 
modulation.

Kehagia AA(1), Murray GK, Robbins TW.

Author information:
(1)Behavioural and Clinical Neuroscience Institute, University of Cambridge, 
Downing Street, Cambridge CB2 3EB, UK. ak423@cam.ac.uk

Learning in a constant environment, and adapting flexibly to a changing one, 
through changes in reinforcement contingencies or valence-free cues, depends on 
overlapping circuitry that interconnects the prefrontal cortex (PFC) with the 
striatum and is subject to several forms of neurochemical modulation. We present 
evidence from recent studies in animals employing electrophysiological, 
pharmacological and lesion techniques, and neuroimaging, neuropsychological and 
pharmacological investigations of healthy humans and clinical patients. Dopamine 
(DA) neurotransmission in the medial striatum and PFC is critical for basic 
reinforcement learning and the integration of negative feedback during reversal 
learning, whilst orbitofrontal 5-hydroxytryptamine (5-HT) likely mediates this 
type of low level flexibility, perhaps by reducing interference from salient 
stimuli. The role of prefrontal noradrenaline (NA) in higher order flexibility 
indexed through attentional set-shifting has recently received significant 
empirical support, and similar avenues appear promising in the field of task 
switching.

(c) 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.conb.2010.01.007
PMID: 20167474 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


506. Brain Sci. 2025 Oct 13;15(10):1100. doi: 10.3390/brainsci15101100.

Difficulty in Attention Switching and Its Neural Basis in Problematic Smartphone 
Use.

Kobayashi N(1)(2), Jitoku D(1)(2), Hamamura T(3), Honjo M(4), Yamaguchi Y(1), 
Shimizu M(1), Takagi S(1), Fujino J(1), Sugihara G(1), Takahashi H(1)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Institute Science Tokyo, Tokyo 113-8510, Japan.
(2)Institute of Biomedical Engineering, Medical Engineering Laboratory, 
Department of Cyber Psychiatry, Institute Science Tokyo, Tokyo 113-8510, Japan.
(3)National Center for Cognitive Behavior Therapy and Research, National Center 
of Neurology and Psychiatry, Tokyo 187-8553, Japan.
(4)KDDI Research, Inc., Saitama 356-8502, Japan.
(5)Institute of Biomedical Engineering Center for Brain Integration Research, 
Institute of Science Tokyo, Tokyo 113-8510, Japan.

Background: Problematic smartphone use (PSU) involves excessive smartphone 
engagement that disrupts daily functioning and is linked to attentional control 
deficits and altered reward processing. The nucleus accumbens (NAcc), a key 
structure in the reward system, may contribute to difficulty disengaging from 
rewarding digital content. This study examined relationships between NAcc 
volume, attentional switching, and objectively measured nighttime screen time in 
individuals with PSU. Methods: Fifty-three participants (aged ≥ 13 years) from 
an outpatient internet dependency clinic completed psychological assessments, 
brain MRI, and smartphone logging. PSU was diagnosed by two psychiatrists. 
Attentional switching was measured via the Autism Spectrum Quotient subscale. 
Nighttime screen time (00:00-06:00) was recorded via smartphone. MRI-derived 
NAcc volumes were normalized to total gray matter volume. Correlations, multiple 
regression (controlling for ASD and ADHD), and mediation analyses were 
conducted. Results: Difficulty in attention switching correlated with larger 
right NAcc volume (r = 0.45, p = 0.012) and increased nighttime screen time (r = 
0.44, p = 0.014). Right NAcc volume also correlated with nighttime screen time 
(r = 0.46, p = 0.012). Regression showed right NAcc volume predicted nighttime 
screen time (β = 0.33, p = 0.022), whereas attentional switching was not 
significant. Mediation was unsupported. Sensitivity analyses confirmed 
associations. Conclusions: Larger right NAcc volume independently predicts 
prolonged nighttime smartphone use and is associated with impaired attentional 
switching in PSU. Structural variations in reward-related regions may underlie 
difficulty disengaging from digital content. Integrating neurobiological, 
cognitive, and behavioral measures offers a framework for understanding PSU.

DOI: 10.3390/brainsci15101100
PMCID: PMC12563531
PMID: 41154194

Conflict of interest statement: This research was funded by KDDI Corporation and 
KDDI Research, Inc. The smartphone logging application used in this study was 
developed by KDDI Research, Inc. Nanase Kobayashi and Daisuke Jitoku are 
affiliated with the Joint Research Chair between KDDI Corporation, KDDI 
Research, Inc., and the Institute of Science, Tokyo. Masaru Honjo is an employee 
of KDDI Research, Inc. Toshitaka Hamamura was an employee of KDDI Research, Inc. 
during the period when he contributed to this study and received a salary from 
the company. Hidehiko Takahashi is involved in a collaborative research project 
with KDDI Corporation and KDDI Research, Inc. The funders were involved in the 
development of the data collection tool but had no role in the design of the 
study; in the analyses or interpretation of the data; in the writing of the 
manuscript; or in the decision to publish the results. All raw data were 
anonymized and stored under the responsibility of the academic institutions. The 
final statistical analyses and interpretation were independently conducted by 
the university research team to ensure data integrity.


507. Neuroimage. 2016 May 15;132:24-31. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2016.02.025. Epub 
2016 Feb 15.

Electrophysiological evidence for flexible goal-directed cue processing during 
episodic retrieval.

Herron JE(1), Evans LH(2), Wilding EL(3).

Author information:
(1)Cardiff University Brain Research Imaging Centre (CUBRIC), School of 
Psychology, Cardiff University, Cardiff CF10 3AT, Wales, UK. Electronic address: 
HerronJ1@cardiff.ac.uk.
(2)Cardiff University Brain Research Imaging Centre (CUBRIC), School of 
Psychology, Cardiff University, Cardiff CF10 3AT, Wales, UK. Electronic address: 
EvansLH@cardiff.ac.uk.
(3)Cardiff University Brain Research Imaging Centre (CUBRIC), School of 
Psychology, Cardiff University, Cardiff CF10 3AT, Wales, UK. Electronic address: 
Edward.Wilding@nottingham.ac.uk.

A widely held assumption is that memory retrieval is aided by cognitive control 
processes that are engaged flexibly in service of memory retrieval and memory 
decisions. While there is some empirical support for this view, a notable 
exception is the absence of evidence for the flexible use of retrieval control 
in functional neuroimaging experiments requiring frequent switches between tasks 
with different cognitive demands. This absence is troublesome in so far as 
frequent switches between tasks mimic some of the challenges that are typically 
placed on memory outside the laboratory. In this experiment we instructed 
participants to alternate frequently between three episodic memory tasks 
requiring item recognition or retrieval of one of two different kinds of 
contextual information encoded in a prior study phase (screen location or 
encoding task). Event-related potentials (ERPs) elicited by unstudied items in 
the two tasks requiring retrieval of study context were reliably different, 
demonstrating for the first time that ERPs index task-specific processing of 
retrieval cues when retrieval goals change frequently. The inclusion of the item 
recognition task was a novel and important addition in this study, because only 
the ERPs elicited by unstudied items in one of the two context conditions 
diverged from those in the item recognition condition. This outcome constrains 
functional interpretations of the differences that emerged between the two 
context conditions and emphasises the utility of this baseline in functional 
imaging studies of retrieval processing operations.

Copyright © 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2016.02.025
PMCID: PMC4862957
PMID: 26892854 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


508. Neuropsychologia. 2006;44(11):2037-78. doi: 
10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2006.02.006. Epub 2006 Mar 31.

Development of cognitive control and executive functions from 4 to 13 years: 
evidence from manipulations of memory, inhibition, and task switching.

Davidson MC(1), Amso D, Anderson LC, Diamond A.

Author information:
(1)Sackler Institute for Developmental Psychobiology, Weill Medical College of 
Cornell University, New York, NY, USA.

Predictions concerning development, interrelations, and possible independence of 
working memory, inhibition, and cognitive flexibility were tested in 325 
participants (roughly 30 per age from 4 to 13 years and young adults; 50% 
female). All were tested on the same computerized battery, designed to 
manipulate memory and inhibition independently and together, in steady state 
(single-task blocks) and during task-switching, and to be appropriate over the 
lifespan and for neuroimaging (fMRI). This is one of the first studies, in 
children or adults, to explore: (a) how memory requirements interact with 
spatial compatibility and (b) spatial incompatibility effects both with 
stimulus-specific rules (Simon task) and with higher-level, conceptual rules. 
Even the youngest children could hold information in mind, inhibit a dominant 
response, and combine those as long as the inhibition required was steady-state 
and the rules remained constant. Cognitive flexibility (switching between 
rules), even with memory demands minimized, showed a longer developmental 
progression, with 13-year-olds still not at adult levels. Effects elicited only 
in Mixed blocks with adults were found in young children even in single-task 
blocks; while young children could exercise inhibition in steady state it 
exacted a cost not seen in adults, who (unlike young children) seemed to re-set 
their default response when inhibition of the same tendency was required 
throughout a block. The costs associated with manipulations of inhibition were 
greater in young children while the costs associated with increasing memory 
demands were greater in adults. Effects seen only in RT in adults were seen 
primarily in accuracy in young children. Adults slowed down on difficult trials 
to preserve accuracy; but the youngest children were impulsive; their RT 
remained more constant but at an accuracy cost on difficult trials. Contrary to 
our predictions of independence between memory and inhibition, when matched for 
difficulty RT correlations between these were as high as 0.8, although accuracy 
correlations were less than half that. Spatial incompatibility effects and 
global and local switch costs were evident in children and adults, differing 
only in size. Other effects (e.g., asymmetric switch costs and the interaction 
of switching rules and switching response-sites) differed fundamentally over 
age.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2006.02.006
PMCID: PMC1513793
PMID: 16580701 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


509. Neuroimage. 2019 Jul 1;194:174-181. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2019.03.038. Epub 
2019 Mar 22.

Pre-retrieval event-related potentials predict source memory during task 
switching.

Evans LH(1), Herron JE(2).

Author information:
(1)Cardiff University Brain Research Imaging Centre (CUBRIC), School of 
Psychology, Cardiff University, Cardiff, CF24 4HQ, Wales, UK.
(2)Cardiff University Brain Research Imaging Centre (CUBRIC), School of 
Psychology, Cardiff University, Cardiff, CF24 4HQ, Wales, UK. Electronic 
address: herronj1@cardiff.ac.uk.

Neural activity preceding memory probes differs according to retrieval goals. 
These divergences have been linked to retrieval orientations, which are 
content-specific memory states that bias retrieval towards specific contents. 
Here, participants were cued to retrieve either spatial location or encoding 
operations. On the first trial of each memory task ('switch' trials), 
preparatory ERPs preceding correct source memory judgments differed according to 
retrieval goal, but this effect was absent preceding memory errors. Initiating 
appropriate retrieval orientations therefore predicted criterial recollection. 
Preparatory ERPs on the second trial of each memory task (i.e. 'stay' trials) 
also differed according to retrieval goal, but the polarity of this effect was 
reversed from that observed on switch trials and the effect did not predict 
memory accuracy. This was interpreted as a correlate of retrieval orientation 
maintenance, with initiation and maintenance forming dissociable components of 
these goal-directed memory states. More generally, these findings highlight the 
importance of pre-retrieval processes in episodic memory.

Copyright © 2019 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2019.03.038
PMCID: PMC6547053
PMID: 30910727 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


510. Neuroimage. 2025 Apr 15;310:121160. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2025.121160. Epub 
2025 Mar 18.

Task-switching and frontal cortex functioning across adulthood: An fNIRS study.

Yeung MK(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, The Education University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, 
China; University Research Facility of Human Behavioral Neuroscience, The 
Education University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China; University Research 
Facility in Behavioral and Systems Neuroscience, The Hong Kong Polytechnic 
University, Hong Kong, China. Electronic address: michaelyeung@eduhk.hk.

Switching between tasks is slower and more error-prone than performing a single 
task. While studies have compared task-switching and associated neural 
processing between younger and older adults, knowledge of age-related 
differences in components of task-switching across adulthood, and associated 
neural mechanisms, remains elusive. In this study, these age differences were 
investigated using functional near-infrared spectroscopy (fNIRS). A sample of 
132 adults aged 18-79 undertook a variant of the Trail Making Test and a 
task-switching paradigm. Hemodynamic changes in the bilateral frontal cortex 
during the task-switching paradigm were measured using a 48-channel fNIRS 
device. Behavioral results showed that age showed a negative linear relationship 
with time taken to task-switch and a negative quadratic relationship with 
success in task-switching. In addition, fNIRS results showed that age had a 
positive linear relationship with activation in the left posterolateral frontal 
cortex across trial conditions. Among older adults, who had slower and less 
accurate switch performance than younger adults, greater left posterolateral 
frontal activation was associated with faster and more accurate switch 
performance. Therefore, different aspects of task-switching performance exhibit 
varying patterns of age-related differences across adulthood. Increased 
engagement of the left posterolateral frontal cortex, which plays a specific 
role in reconfiguring and implementing relevant task rules, may help older 
adults compensate for declined switch performance.

Copyright © 2025. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2025.121160
PMID: 40113117 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The author has 
no conflict of interest to disclose.


511. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2001 Feb 13;98(4):2095-100. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.98.4.2095.

The neural basis of task-switching in working memory: effects of performance and 
aging.

Smith EE(1), Geva A, Jonides J, Miller A, Reuter-Lorenz P, Koeppe RA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA. 
eesmith@umich.edu

We studied the performance of young and senior subjects on a well known working 
memory task, the Operation Span. This is a dual-task in which subjects perform a 
memory task while simultaneously verifying simple equations. Positron-emission 
tomography scans were taken during performance. Both young and senior subjects 
demonstrated a cost in accuracy and latency in the Operation Span compared with 
performing each component task alone (math verification or memory only). Senior 
subjects were disproportionately impaired relative to young subjects on the 
dual-task. When brain activation was examined for senior subjects, we found 
regions in prefrontal cortex that were active in the dual-task, but not in the 
component tasks. Similar results were obtained for young subjects who performed 
relatively poorly on the dual-task; however, for young subjects who performed 
relatively well in the dual-task, we found no prefrontal regions that were 
active only in the dual-task. Results are discussed as they relate to the 
executive component of task switching.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.98.4.2095
PMCID: PMC29387
PMID: 11172081 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


512. Neuroimage. 2016 Jan 1;124(Pt A):843-857. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2015.09.035. 
Epub 2015 Sep 28.

Asymmetry in prefrontal resting-state EEG spectral power underlies individual 
differences in phasic and sustained cognitive control.

Ambrosini E(1), Vallesi A(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroscience, University of Padua, 35128 Padua, Italy. 
Electronic address: ettore.ambrosini@unipd.it.
(2)Department of Neuroscience, University of Padua, 35128 Padua, Italy; 
Cognitive Neuroscience Center, University of Padua, 35128 Padua, Italy.

In our daily life, we constantly exert sustained and phasic cognitive control 
processes to manage multiple competing task sets and rapidly switch between 
them. Increasing research efforts are attempting to unveil how the brain 
mediates these processes, highlighting the importance of the prefrontal cortex. 
An intriguing question concerns the influence of hemispheric asymmetries and 
whether it may be generalized to different cognitive domains depending on 
lateralized processing. Another currently open question concerns the underlying 
causes of the observed huge inter-individual variability in cognitive control 
abilities. Here we tackle these issues by investigating whether participants' 
hemispheric asymmetry in intrinsic (i.e., resting-state-related) brain dynamics 
can reflect differences in their phasic and/or sustained cognitive control 
abilities regardless of the cognitive domain. To this aim, we recorded human 
participants' resting-state electroencephalographic activity and performed a 
source-based spectral analysis to assess their lateralized brain dynamics at 
rest. Moreover, we used three task-switching paradigms involving different 
cognitive domains to assess participants' domain-general phasic and sustained 
cognitive control abilities. By performing a series of correlations and an 
intersection analysis, we showed that participants with stronger left- and 
right-lateralized intrinsic brain activity in the middle frontal gyrus were more 
able, respectively, to exert phasic and sustained cognitive control. We propose 
that the variability in participants' prefrontal hemispheric asymmetry in the 
intrinsic electrophysiological spectral profile reflects individual differences 
in preferentially engaging either the left-lateralized, phasic or the 
right-lateralized, sustained cognitive control processes to regulate their 
behavior in response to changing task demands, regardless of the specific 
cognitive domain involved.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2015.09.035
PMID: 26416650 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


513. Psychiatry Res Neuroimaging. 2022 Aug;324:111507. doi: 
10.1016/j.pscychresns.2022.111507. Epub 2022 Jun 2.

The role of attentional shifting in the relation between error monitoring and 
anxiety in youth.

Ramos ML(1), Bechor M(2), Casas A(2), Pettit JW(2), Silverman WK(3), 
Reeb-Sutherland BC(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Florida International University, Miami, FL, 33199, 
USA. Electronic address: mramo033@fiu.edu.
(2)Department of Psychology, Florida International University, Miami, FL, 33199, 
USA.
(3)Yale Child Study Center, Yale University, New Haven, CT 06520, USA.

The error-related negativity (ERN), a well-established neural marker of anxiety, 
reflects enhanced attention to internal threat signals. While attention to 
threat plays a crucial role in the development and maintenance of anxiety, it is 
unclear how attentional control influences the ERN-anxiety association. To 
address this, 37 youths (Mage = 10.89 years) completed self-report measures of 
attentional control and anxiety symptoms. To obtain ERN amplitude, youth 
completed a flanker task while simultaneous EEG was collected. Attentional 
control, specifically attentional shifting rather than focusing, moderated the 
relation between ERN amplitude and anxiety. Youth who displayed smaller neural 
responses to making an error and higher ability to shift attention experienced 
lower levels of anxiety, relative to those who exhibited larger neural responses 
to making an error or lower attention-shifting ability. These findings highlight 
that response magnitude to internal threat and ability to flexibly shift 
attention may jointly contribute to anxiety in youth.

Copyright © 2022. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pscychresns.2022.111507
PMCID: PMC9730549
PMID: 35675720 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest None


514. Neuroimage. 2024 Oct 15;300:120855. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2024.120855. Epub 
2024 Sep 17.

High autistic traits linked with reduced performance on affective task 
switching: An ERP study.

Zhou S(1), Chen Z(1), Liu G(1), Ma L(1), Liu Y(2).

Author information:
(1)School of Educational Sciences, Chongqing Normal University, Chongqing, 
China; Key Laboratory of Applied Psychology, Chongqing Normal University, 
Chongqing, China.
(2)School of Educational Sciences, Chongqing Normal University, Chongqing, 
China; Key Laboratory of Applied Psychology, Chongqing Normal University, 
Chongqing, China. Electronic address: liuya84@126.com.

Few studies have investigated affective flexibility in individuals with high 
autistic traits. In the present study, we employed affective task-switching 
paradigm combined with event related potential (ERP) technology to explore 
affective flexibility in individuals with high autistic traits. Participants 
were instructed to switch between identifying the gender (gender task) and 
emotion (emotion task) of presented faces. Two groups of participants were 
recruited based on the Autism Spectrum Quotient (AQ) scores: a High Autistic 
Group (HAG) and a Low Autistic Group (LAG). The results confirmed that the HAG 
exhibited greater behavioral emotion switch costs and increased N2 and decreased 
P3 components when switching to the emotion task. Additionally, we identified an 
affective asymmetric switch cost in the HAG, where the switch cost for the 
emotion task was larger than for the gender task at both behavioral and 
electrophysiological levels. In contrast, a symmetrical switch cost was observed 
in the LAG. These findings indicate that the HAG experiences difficulties with 
affective flexibility, particularly in tasks involving emotional processing. The 
patterns of affective asymmetric switch costs observed in both groups differed 
from previous results in autistic children and the general population, 
suggesting that the relative dominance of gender and emotion tasks may vary 
between the two groups. We propose that the dominance of emotion tasks declines 
as autistic traits increase.

Copyright © 2024. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2024.120855
PMID: 39299661 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or 
financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of 
interest.


515. Neuroimage. 2013 Jan 1;64:290-8. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2012.08.079. Epub 
2012 Sep 4.

BDNF Val66Met polymorphism and goal-directed behavior in healthy elderly - 
evidence from auditory distraction.

Getzmann S(1), Gajewski PD, Hengstler JG, Falkenstein M, Beste C.

Author information:
(1)Leibniz Research Centre for Working Environment and Human Factors at 
Technical University of Dortmund (IfADo), Germany. stephan.getzmann@rub.de

Aging affects the ability to focus attention on a given task and to ignore 
distractors. These functions subserve response control processes for which 
fronto-striatal networks have been shown to play an important role. Within these 
networks, the brain-derived-neurotrophic-factor (BDNF), which is known to 
underlie aging effects, plays a pivotal role. We investigated how cognitive 
subprocesses constituting a cycle of distraction, orientation and refocusing of 
attention are affected by the functional BDNF Val66Met polymorphism using 
event-related potentials (ERPs) in 122 healthy elderly. Using an auditory 
distraction paradigm we found that the Val/Val genotype confers a disadvantage 
to its carriers. This disadvantage was partly compensated by intensified 
attentional shifting mechanisms. It could be based on response selection 
processes being more vulnerable against interference from distractors in this 
genotype group. Processes reflecting transient sensory memory processes, or the 
re-orientation of attention were not affected by the BDNF Val66Met polymorphism, 
suggesting a higher importance of BDNF for mechanisms related to response 
control, than stimulus processing. The results add on recent literature showing 
that the Met allele confers some benefit to its carriers. We suggest an account 
for unifying different results of BDNF Val66Met association studies in executive 
functions, based on the role of BDNF in fronto-striatal circuits.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2012.08.079
PMID: 22963854 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


516. Front Aging Neurosci. 2016 Jul 13;8:162. doi: 10.3389/fnagi.2016.00162. 
eCollection 2016.

The Indirect Effect of Age Group on Switch Costs via Gray Matter Volume and 
Task-Related Brain Activity.

Steffener J(1), Gazes Y(2), Habeck C(2), Stern Y(2).

Author information:
(1)PERFORM Center, Concordia University, MontrealQC, Canada; Centre de Recherche 
de l'Institut de Gériatrie de Montréal, MontréalQC, Canada; Department of 
Psychology, Concordia University, MontrealQC, Canada.
(2)Cognitive Neuroscience Division, Department of Neurology and Taub Institute 
for Research on Alzheimer's Disease and The Aging Brain, Columbia University 
College of Physicians and Surgeons, New York NY, USA.

Healthy aging simultaneously affects brain structure, brain function, and 
cognition. These effects are often investigated in isolation ignoring any 
relationships between them. It is plausible that age related declines in 
cognitive performance are the result of age-related structural and functional 
changes. This straightforward idea is tested in within a conceptual research 
model of cognitive aging. The current study tested whether age-related declines 
in task-performance were explained by age-related differences in brain structure 
and brain function using a task-switching paradigm in 175 participants. 
Sixty-three young and 112 old participants underwent MRI scanning of brain 
structure and brain activation. The experimental task was an executive context 
dual task with switch costs in response time as the behavioral measure. A serial 
mediation model was applied voxel-wise throughout the brain testing all pathways 
between age group, gray matter volume, brain activation and increased switch 
costs, worsening performance. There were widespread age group differences in 
gray matter volume and brain activation. Switch costs also significantly 
differed by age group. There were brain regions demonstrating significant 
indirect effects of age group on switch costs via the pathway through gray 
matter volume and brain activation. These were in the bilateral precuneus, 
bilateral parietal cortex, the left precentral gyrus, cerebellum, fusiform, and 
occipital cortices. There were also significant indirect effects via the brain 
activation pathway after controlling for gray matter volume. These effects were 
in the cerebellum, occipital cortex, left precentral gyrus, bilateral 
supramarginal, bilateral parietal, precuneus, middle cingulate extending to 
medial superior frontal gyri and the left middle frontal gyri. There were no 
significant effects through the gray matter volume alone pathway. These results 
demonstrate that a large proportion of the age group effect on switch costs can 
be attributed to individual differences in gray matter volume and brain 
activation. Therefore, age-related neural effects underlying cognitive control 
are a complex interaction between brain structure and function. Furthermore, the 
analyses demonstrate the feasibility of utilizing multiple neuroimaging 
modalities within a conceptual research model of cognitive aging.

DOI: 10.3389/fnagi.2016.00162
PMCID: PMC4942475
PMID: 27468265


517. Cortex. 2017 Aug;93:178-192. doi: 10.1016/j.cortex.2017.05.020. Epub 2017 Jun 3.

Normal aging and Parkinson's disease are associated with the functional decline 
of distinct frontal-striatal circuits.

Gruszka A(1), Hampshire A(2), Barker RA(3), Owen AM(4).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Psychology, Jagiellonian University, Krakow, Poland. Electronic 
address: a.gruszka-gosiewska@uj.edu.pl.
(2)The Division of Brain Sciences, Imperial College London, UK.
(3)Cambridge Centre for Brain Repair, University of Cambridge, UK; Department of 
Neurology, Addenbrooke's Hospital, Cambridge, UK.
(4)The Brain and Mind Institute, University of Western Ontario, Canada.

Impaired ability to shift attention between stimuli (i.e. shifting attentional 
'set') is a well-established part of the dysexecutive syndrome in Parkinson's 
Disease (PD), nevertheless cognitive and neural bases of this deficit remain 
unclear. In this study, an fMRI-optimised variant of a classic paradigm for 
assessing attentional control (Hampshire and Owen 2006) was used to contrast 
activity in dissociable executive circuits in early-stage PD patients and 
controls. The results demonstrated that the neural basis of the executive 
performance impairments in PD is accompanied by hypoactivation within the 
striatum, anterior cingulate cortex (vACC), and inferior frontal sulcus (IFS) 
regions. By contrast, in aging it is associated with hypoactivation of the 
anterior insula/inferior frontal operculum (AI/FO) and the pre-supplementary 
motor area (preSMA). Between group behavioural differences were also observed; 
whereas normally aging individuals exhibited routine-problem solving deficits, 
PD patients demonstrated more global task learning deficits. These findings 
concur with recent research demonstrating model-based reinforcement learning 
deficits in PD and provide evidence that the AI/FO and IFS circuits are 
differentially impacted by PD and normal aging.

Copyright © 2017 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cortex.2017.05.020
PMCID: PMC5542042
PMID: 28667892 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


518. Brain Sci. 2019 Nov 27;9(12):343. doi: 10.3390/brainsci9120343.

Electrophysiological Markers of Visuospatial Attention Recovery after Mild 
Traumatic Brain Injury.

Bolduc-Teasdale J(1)(2), Jolicoeur P(2), McKerral M(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Interdisciplinary Research in Rehabilitation (CRIR), IURDPM, 
CIUSSS du Centre-Sud-de-l'Île-de-Montréal, Montreal, QC H3S 1M9, Canada.
(2)Department of Psychology, Université de Montréal, Montreal, QC H3C 3J7, 
Canada.

OBJECTIVE: Attentional problems are amongst the most commonly reported 
complaints following mild traumatic brain injury (mTBI), including difficulties 
orienting and disengaging attention, sustaining it over time, and dividing 
attentional resources across multiple simultaneous demands. The objective of 
this study was to track, using a single novel electrophysiological task, various 
components associated with the deployment of visuospatial selective attention.
METHODS: A paradigm was designed to evoke earlier visual evoked potentials 
(VEPs), as well as attention-related and visuocognitive ERPs. Data from 36 
individuals with mTBI (19 subacute, 17 chronic) and 22 uninjured controls are 
presented. Postconcussion symptoms (PCS), anxiety (BAI), depression (BDI-II) and 
visual attention (TEA Map Search, DKEFS Trail Making Test) were also assessed.
RESULTS: Earlier VEPs (P1, N1), as well as processes related to visuospatial 
orientation (N2pc) and encoding in visual short-term memory (SPCN), appear 
comparable in mTBI and control participants. However, there appears to be a 
disruption in the spatiotemporal dynamics of attention (N2pc-Ptc, P2) in 
subacute mTBI, which recovers within six months. This is also reflected in 
altered neuropsychological performance (information processing speed, 
attentional shifting). Furthermore, orientation of attention (P3a) and working 
memory processes (P3b) are also affected and remain as such in the chronic 
post-mTBI period, in co-occurrence with persisting postconcussion 
symptomatology.
CONCLUSIONS: This study adds original findings indicating that such a sensitive 
and rigorous ERP task implemented at diagnostic and follow-up levels could allow 
for the identification of subtle but complex brain activation and connectivity 
deficits that can occur following mTBI.

DOI: 10.3390/brainsci9120343
PMCID: PMC6956036
PMID: 31783501

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


519. Trends Cogn Sci. 2003 Mar;7(3):134-140. doi: 10.1016/s1364-6613(03)00028-7.

Task switching.

Monsell S(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Psychology University of Exeter, EX4 4QG, Exeter, UK

Everyday life requires frequent shifts between cognitive tasks. Research 
reviewed in this article probes the control processes that reconfigure mental 
resources for a change of task by requiring subjects to switch frequently among 
a small set of simple tasks. Subjects' responses are substantially slower and, 
usually, more error-prone immediately after a task switch. This 'switch cost' is 
reduced, but not eliminated, by an opportunity for preparation. It seems to 
result from both transient and long-term carry-over of 'task-set' activation and 
inhibition as well as time consumed by task-set reconfiguration processes. 
Neuroimaging studies of task switching have revealed extra activation in 
numerous brain regions when subjects prepare to change tasks and when they 
perform a changed task, but we cannot yet separate 'controlling' from 
'controlled' regions.

DOI: 10.1016/s1364-6613(03)00028-7
PMID: 12639695


520. Neuroimage. 2019 Mar;188:274-281. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2018.12.016. Epub 
2018 Dec 10.

The strength of alpha and gamma oscillations predicts behavioral switch costs.

Proskovec AL(1), Wiesman AI(2), Wilson TW(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Nebraska - Omaha, NE, USA; Center for 
Magnetoencephalography, University of Nebraska Medical Center (UNMC), Omaha, NE, 
USA; Department of Neurological Sciences, UNMC, Omaha, NE, USA.
(2)Center for Magnetoencephalography, University of Nebraska Medical Center 
(UNMC), Omaha, NE, USA; Department of Neurological Sciences, UNMC, Omaha, NE, 
USA.
(3)Department of Psychology, University of Nebraska - Omaha, NE, USA; Center for 
Magnetoencephalography, University of Nebraska Medical Center (UNMC), Omaha, NE, 
USA; Department of Neurological Sciences, UNMC, Omaha, NE, USA. Electronic 
address: twwilson@unmc.edu.

Cognitive flexibility is often examined using task-switch paradigms, whereby 
individuals either switch between tasks or repeat the same task on successive 
trials. The behavioral costs of switching in terms of accuracy and reaction time 
are well-known, but the oscillatory dynamics underlying such costs are poorly 
understood. Herein, we examined 25 healthy adults who performed a task-switching 
paradigm during magnetoencephalography (MEG). All MEG data were transformed into 
the time-frequency domain and significant oscillatory responses were imaged 
separately per condition (i.e., switch, repeat) using a beamformer. To determine 
the impact of task-switching on the neural dynamics, the resulting images were 
examined using paired-samples t-tests. Whole-brain correlations were also 
computed using the switch-related difference images (switch - repeat) and the 
switch-related behavioral data (i.e., switch costs). Our key results indicated 
stronger decreases in alpha and beta activity, and greater increases in gamma 
activity in nodes of the cingulo-opercular and fronto-parietal networks during 
switch relative to repeat trials. In addition, behavioral switch costs were 
positively correlated with switch-related differences in right frontal and 
inferior parietal alpha activity, and negatively correlated with switch effects 
in anterior cingulate and right temporoparietal gamma activity. In other words, 
participants who had a greater decrease in alpha or increase in gamma in these 
respective regions had smaller behavioral switch costs, which suggests that 
these oscillations are critical to supporting cognitive flexibility. In sum, we 
provide novel data linking switch effects and gamma oscillations, and employed a 
whole-brain approach to directly link switch-related oscillatory differences 
with switch-related performance differences.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2018.12.016
PMCID: PMC6401274
PMID: 30543844 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


521. Neuroimage Clin. 2026 Feb 20;49:103975. doi: 10.1016/j.nicl.2026.103975. Online 
ahead of print.

Theta-Alpha Dysregulation reveals impaired endogenous cognitive control in 
adolescent Obsessive-Compulsive disorder.

Rempel S(1), Böttcher A(2), Beyer N(3), Roessner V(4), Beste C(5).

Author information:
(1)Cognitive Neurophysiology, Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 
Faculty of Medicine of the TU Dresden 01307 Dresden, Germany; Department of 
Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, Faculty of Medicine of the TU Dresden 01307 
Dresden, Germany. Electronic address: Sarah.Rempel@ukdd.de.
(2)Cognitive Neurophysiology, Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 
Faculty of Medicine of the TU Dresden 01307 Dresden, Germany.
(3)Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, Faculty of Medicine of the TU 
Dresden 01307 Dresden, Germany.
(4)Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, Faculty of Medicine of the TU 
Dresden 01307 Dresden, Germany; German Center for Child and Adolescent Health 
(DZKJ), Partner site Leipzig/Dresden, Dresden, Germany.
(5)Cognitive Neurophysiology, Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 
Faculty of Medicine of the TU Dresden 01307 Dresden, Germany; German Center for 
Child and Adolescent Health (DZKJ), Partner site Leipzig/Dresden, Dresden, 
Germany.

Obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) is characterized by rigid thoughts and 
behaviors that may compromise cognitive flexibility, yet, especially in 
adolescence results are inconclusive. This is all the more the case concerning 
the question whether flexibility deficits emerge specifically when endogenous 
control, internal monitoring, and working-memory-dependent task-set management 
are required. In an EEG-beamforming study, we examined adolescents with OCD (N = 
68) and healthy controls (HC) (N = 73) in a task-switching paradigm with 
cue-based (exogenous, externally guided) and memory-based (endogenous, 
internally guided). Behaviorally, both groups showed typical switch-cost 
patterns, with greater demands in the memory-based block, and no group 
differences in switch costs. Oscillatory EEG data revealed marked group 
differences. During cue-based switching, both groups showed preserved pre-target 
TBA and ABA modulations in frontal-parietal networks, indicating intact 
externally preparatory control. In contrast, only HC adolescents showed 
pre-target TBA increases during memory-based switching, suggesting impaired 
endogenous task-set updating in OCD. Reactive processes further distinguished 
groups. In the cue-based block, adolescents with OCD showed switch-related ABA 
reductions in centro-parietal regions, possibly reflecting inefficient task-set 
stabilization despite intact behavior. In the memory-based block, HCs displayed 
coordinated TBA-ABA differentiation supporting internally generated updating, 
whereas the OCD group showed isolated TBA modulation without accompanying ABA 
effects, indicating disrupted integration of updating and gating mechanisms. 
Together, these findings show a dissociation between externally and internally 
guided flexibility in adolescent OCD.

Copyright © 2026 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.nicl.2026.103975
PMCID: PMC12945646
PMID: 41723930


522. Front Psychol. 2017 Oct 31;8:1832. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2017.01832. eCollection 
2017.

Positive Emotion Facilitates Cognitive Flexibility: An fMRI Study.

Wang Y(1)(2)(3), Chen J(2), Yue Z(4).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Education, East China Normal University, Shanghai, China.
(2)The School of Psychology and Cognitive Science, East China Normal University, 
Shanghai, China.
(3)Department of Psychology, Capital Normal University, Beijing, China.
(4)Department of Psychology, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China.

Cognitive flexibility is the ability to switch rapidly between multiple goals. 
By using a task-switching paradigm, the present study investigated how positive 
emotion affected cognitive flexibility and the underlying neural mechanisms. 
After viewing pictures of different emotional valence (positive, negative, or 
neutral), participants discriminated whether a target digit in a specific color 
was odd or even. After a series of trials, the color of target stimuli was 
changed, i.e., the switch condition. Switch costs were measured by the increase 
of reaction times (RTs) in the switch trials compared to those in the repeat 
trials. Behavior results indicated that switch costs significantly decreased in 
the positive emotional condition, and increased in the negative emotional 
condition, compared with those in the neutral condition. Imaging data revealed 
enhanced activation in the dorsal anterior cingulate cortex (dACC) in switch 
trials than those in repeat trials. Moreover, the interaction between emotion 
(positive, negative, neutral) and trial type (repeat vs. switch) was 
significant. For switch trials, the activation of dACC decreased significantly 
in the positive condition, while increased significantly in the negative 
condition compared to neutral condition. By contrast, for repeat trials, no 
significant difference was observed for the activation of dACC among three 
emotional conditions. Our results showed that positive emotions could increase 
the cognitive flexibility and reduce the conflict by decreasing the activation 
of dACC.

DOI: 10.3389/fpsyg.2017.01832
PMCID: PMC5671657
PMID: 29163255


523. Neuroimage. 2017 Oct 1;159:280-288. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2017.07.063. Epub 
2017 Aug 4.

Bilinguals have more complex EEG brain signals in occipital regions than 
monolinguals.

Grundy JG(1), Anderson JAE(1), Bialystok E(2).

Author information:
(1)York University, Canada.
(2)York University, Canada. Electronic address: ellenb@yorku.ca.

Brain signal complexity increases with development and is associated with better 
cognitive outcomes in older age. Research has also shown that bilinguals are 
able to stave off cognitive decline for longer periods of time than 
monolinguals, but no studies to date have examined whether bilinguals have more 
complex brain signals than monolinguals. Here we explored the hypothesis that 
bilingualism leads to greater brain signal complexity by examining multiscale 
entropy (MSE) in monolingual and bilingual young adults while EEG was recorded 
during a task-switching paradigm. Results revealed that bilinguals had greater 
brain signal complexity than monolinguals in occipital regions. Furthermore, 
bilinguals performed better with increasing occipital brain signal complexity, 
whereas monolinguals relied on coupling with frontal regions to demonstrate 
gains in performance. These findings are discussed in terms of how a lifetime of 
experience with a second language leads to more automatic and efficient 
processing of stimuli and how these adaptations could contribute to the 
prevention of cognitive decline in older age.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2017.07.063
PMCID: PMC5671360
PMID: 28782680 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


524. Front Hum Neurosci. 2017 Sep 22;11:464. doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2017.00464. 
eCollection 2017.

Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation Reveals Executive Control Dissociation in the 
Rostral Prefrontal Cortex.

He W(1), Fan C(1), Li L(1).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory for NeuroInformation of Ministry of Education, High-Field 
Magnetic Resonance Brain Imaging Key Laboratory of Sichuan Province, Center for 
Information in Medicine, School of Life Science and Technology, University of 
Electronic Science and Technology of ChinaChengdu, China.

Although previous studies have shown that the rostral prefrontal cortex (rPFC) 
plays a crucial role in executive tasks, the various functions of the rPFC in 
the humans are still understudied. Here we used transcranial magnetic 
stimulation (TMS) with continuous theta burst stimulation (cTBS) to interfere 
with the executive control functions of the right rostrolateral PFC (RLPFC) or 
the right rostromedial PFC (RMPFC). Subjects performed a task-switching 
paradigm, which included spatial detection (SD), prospective memory (PM) and 
working memory (WM) tasks, after cTBS. The performance of 18 healthy volunteers 
was evaluated on different days after cTBS over the right RLPFC, the right 
RMPFC, and the vertex (serving as a control site). The application of cTBS over 
the RLPFC significantly increased the switching costs (SCs) of the error rates 
(ERs) when switching to the PM task, while RMPFC-cTBS decreased SCs of ERs when 
switching to the WM task, compared with the control vertex site. These findings 
provide evidence for a differential role of the RLPFC and the RMPFC in executive 
functions, with a specific involvement of the RLPFC and the RMPFC in PM, and WM, 
respectively.

DOI: 10.3389/fnhum.2017.00464
PMCID: PMC5609102
PMID: 28970790


525. Neuroimage. 2015 May 15;112:254-266. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2015.03.052. Epub 
2015 Mar 25.

Attentional bias to affective faces and complex IAPS images in early visual 
cortex follows emotional cue extraction.

Bekhtereva V(1), Craddock M(2), Müller MM(3).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Psychology, University of Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany.
(2)Institute of Psychological Sciences, University of Leeds, Leeds, UK.
(3)Institute of Psychology, University of Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany. Electronic 
address: m.mueller@rz.uni-leipzig.de.

Emotionally arousing stimuli are known to rapidly draw the brain's processing 
resources, even when they are task-irrelevant. The steady-state visual evoked 
potential (SSVEP) response, a neural response to a flickering stimulus which 
effectively allows measurement of the processing resources devoted to that 
stimulus, has been used to examine this process of attentional shifting. 
Previous studies have used a task in which participants detected periods of 
coherent motion in flickering random dot kinematograms (RDKs) which generate an 
SSVEP, and found that task-irrelevant emotional stimuli withdraw more 
attentional resources from the task-relevant RDKs than task-irrelevant neutral 
stimuli. However, it is not clear whether the emotion-related differences in the 
SSVEP response are conditional on higher-level extraction of emotional cues as 
indexed by well-known event-related potential (ERPs) components (N170, early 
posterior negativity, EPN), or if affective bias in competition for visual 
attention resources is a consequence of a time-invariant shifting process. In 
the present study, we used two different types of emotional distractors - IAPS 
pictures and facial expressions - for which emotional cue extraction occurs at 
different speeds, being typically earlier for faces (at ~170ms, as indexed by 
the N170) than for IAPS images (~220-280ms, EPN). We found that emotional 
modulation of attentional resources as measured by the SSVEP occurred earlier 
for faces (around 180ms) than for IAPS pictures (around 550ms), after the 
extraction of emotional cues as indexed by visual ERP components. This is 
consistent with emotion related re-allocation of attentional resources occurring 
after emotional cue extraction rather than being linked to a time-fixed shifting 
process.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2015.03.052
PMID: 25818682 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


526. Front Optoelectron. 2021 Sep;14(3):278-287. doi: 10.1007/s12200-021-1090-y. Epub 
2021 Apr 27.

Relationship between circadian rhythm and brain cognitive functions.

Xu S(1), Akioma M(1), Yuan Z(2).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Health Sciences, Centre for Cognitive and Brain Sciences, 
University of Macau, Taipa, Macau SAR, China.
(2)Faculty of Health Sciences, Centre for Cognitive and Brain Sciences, 
University of Macau, Taipa, Macau SAR, China. zhenyuan@um.edu.mo.

Circadian rhythms are considered a masterstroke of natural selection, which 
gradually increase the adaptability of species to the Earth's rotation. 
Importantly, the nervous system plays a key role in allowing organisms to 
maintain circadian rhythmicity. Circadian rhythms affect multiple aspects of 
cognitive functions (mainly via arousal), particularly those needed for 
effort-intensive cognitive tasks, which require considerable top-down executive 
control. These include inhibitory control, working memory, task switching, and 
psychomotor vigilance. This mini review highlights the recent advances in 
cognitive functioning in the optical and multimodal neuroimaging fields; it 
discusses the processing of brain cognitive functions during the circadian 
rhythm phase and the effects of the circadian rhythm on the cognitive component 
of the brain and the brain circuit supporting cognition.

© 2021. Higher Education Press.

DOI: 10.1007/s12200-021-1090-y
PMCID: PMC9743892
PMID: 36637731


527. Mov Disord. 2021 Jan;36(1):152-163. doi: 10.1002/mds.28298. Epub 2020 Sep 21.

The Adapted Resistance Training with Instability Randomized Controlled Trial for 
Gait Automaticity.

Vieira-Yano B(1)(2), Martini DN(3), Horak FB(3), de Lima-Pardini A(4), Almeida 
F(1), Santana VP(1), Lima D(1), Batista AX(5), Marquesini R(6), Lira J(1)(6), 
Barbosa ER(7), Corcos DM(8), Ugrinowitsch C(6), Silva-Batista C(1)(2)(6).

Author information:
(1)Exercise Neuroscience Research Group, University of Sao Paulo, Sao Paulo, 
Brazil.
(2)School of Arts, Sciences and Humanities, University of São Paulo, Sao Paulo, 
Brazil.
(3)Department of Neurology, Oregon Health and Science University, Portland, 
Oregon, USA.
(4)Centre for Neuroscience Studies, Queen's University, Kingston, Ontario, 
Canada.
(5)Department of Radiology, University of São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.
(6)Laboratory of Neuromuscular Adaptations to Strength Training, School of 
Physical Education and Sport, University of São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.
(7)Movement Disorders Clinic, Department of Neurology, School of Medicine of the 
University of São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.
(8)Department of Physical Therapy and Human Movement Sciences, Northwestern 
University, Chicago, Illinois, USA.

BACKGROUND: Deficits in the cerebellar locomotor region (CLR) have been 
associated with loss of gait automaticity in individuals with freezing of gait 
in Parkinson's disease (freezers); however, exercise interventions that restore 
gait automaticity in freezers are lacking. We evaluated the effects of the 
adapted resistance training with instability ([ARTI] complex exercises) compared 
with traditional motor rehabilitation (without complex exercises) on gait 
automaticity and attentional set-shifting. We also verified associations between 
gait automaticity change and CLR activation change previously published.
METHODS: Freezers were randomized either to the experimental group (ARTI, n = 
17) or to the active control group (traditional motor rehabilitation, n = 15). 
Both training groups performed exercises 3 times a week for 12 weeks. Gait 
automaticity (dual-task and dual-task cost [DTC] on gait speed and stride 
length), single-task gait speed and stride length, attentional set-shifting 
(time between Trail Making Test parts B and A), and CLR activation during a 
functional magnetic resonance imaging protocol of simulated step initiation task 
were evaluated before and after interventions.
RESULTS: Both training groups improved gait parameters in single task 
(P < 0.05), but ARTI was more effective than traditional motor rehabilitation in 
improving DTC on gait speed, DTC on stride length, dual-task stride length, and 
CLR activation (P < 0.05). Changes in CLR activation were associated with 
changes in DTC on stride length (r = 0.68, P = 0.002) following ARTI. Only ARTI 
improved attentional set-shifting at posttraining (P < 0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: ARTI restores gait automaticity and improves attentional 
set-shifting in freezers attributed to the usage of exercises with high motor 
complexity. © 2020 International Parkinson and Movement Disorder Society.

© 2020 International Parkinson and Movement Disorder Society.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.28298
PMID: 32955752 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


528. Biol Psychol. 2010 Dec;85(3):417-23. doi: 10.1016/j.biopsycho.2010.09.003. Epub 
2010 Sep 15.

Auditory hallucinations and the P3a: attention-switching to speech in 
schizophrenia.

Fisher DJ(1), Labelle A, Knott VJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology/Institute of Neuroscience, Carleton University, 
Ottawa, Ontario, Canada. Derek.Fisher@rohcg.on.ca

BACKGROUND: In line with emerging research strategies focusing on specific 
symptoms rather than global syndromes in psychiatric disorders, we examined the 
functional neural correlates of auditory verbal hallucinations (AHs) in 
schizophrenia. Recent neuroimaging and behavioural evidence suggest altered 
early cognitive processes may be seen in patients with AH as a result of limited 
processing resources.
METHODS: The P3a subcomponent of the P300, an event-related potential (ERP) 
index of early attention switching, was assessed in 12 hallucinating patients 
(HP), 12 non-hallucinating patients (NP) and 12 healthy controls (HC) within a 
passive two-tone auditory oddball paradigm using vowel phonemes. P3a amplitudes 
and latencies were measured in response to across-phoneme changes. Following P3a 
acquisition, patients indicated the duration, intensity and clarity of their 
auditory hallucinations during recording.
RESULTS: Hallucinating patients exhibited smaller P3a amplitudes than 
non-hallucinating patients and healthy controls. In HPs, P3a amplitude was 
negatively correlated with AH trait scores.
SIGNIFICANCE: These findings suggest that AHs are associated with impaired 
processing of speech as evidenced by altered P3a amplitudes to vowel phonemes. 
This finding may be due to limited cognitive resources available for incoming 
external stimuli due to a usurping of finite resources by AHs. The P3a may be a 
useful non-invasive tool for probing relationships between hallucinatory and 
neural states within schizophrenia and the manner in which auditory processing 
is altered in these afflicted patients.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.biopsycho.2010.09.003
PMID: 20837093 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


529. Soc Cogn Affect Neurosci. 2020 Jun 23;15(4):447-465. doi: 10.1093/scan/nsaa058.

Understanding heterosexual women's erotic flexibility: the role of attention in 
sexual evaluations and neural responses to sexual stimuli.

Dickenson JA(1)(2), Diamond L(2), King JB(3)(4), Jenson K(2), Anderson 
JS(3)(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Human Sexuality, California Institute of Integral Studies, San Francisco, CA 
94103, USA.
(2)Department of Psychology, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT 84112, USA.
(3)Department of Radiology and Imaging Sciences, School of Medicine, University 
of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT 84132, USA.
(4)Program in Neuroscience, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT 84108, USA.
(5)Department of Bioengineering, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT 84108, 
USA.

Many women experience desires, arousal and behavior that run counter to their 
sexual orientation (orientation inconsistent, 'OI'). Are such OI sexual 
experiences cognitively and neurobiologically distinct from those that are 
consistent with one's sexual orientation (orientation consistent, 'OC')? To 
address this question, we employed a mindful attention intervention-aimed at 
reducing judgment and enhancing somatosensory attention-to examine the 
underlying attentional and neurobiological processes of OC and OI sexual stimuli 
among predominantly heterosexual women. Women exhibited greater neural activity 
in response to OC, compared to OI, sexual stimuli in regions associated with 
implicit visual processing, volitional appraisal and attention. In contrast, 
women exhibited greater neural activity to OI, relative to OC, sexual stimuli in 
regions associated with complex visual processing and attentional shifting. 
Mindfully attending to OC sexual stimuli reduced distraction, amplified women's 
evaluations of OC stimuli as sexually arousing and deactivated the superior 
cerebellum. In contrast, mindfully attending to OI sexual stimuli amplified 
distraction, decreased women's evaluations of OI stimuli as sexually arousing 
and augmented parietal and temporo-occipital activity. Results of the current 
study constrain hypotheses of female erotic flexibility, suggesting that sexual 
orientation may be maintained by differences in attentional processing that 
cannot be voluntarily altered.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press.

DOI: 10.1093/scan/nsaa058
PMCID: PMC7308660
PMID: 32415978 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


530. Front Psychol. 2014 Mar 26;5:183. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2014.00183. eCollection 
2014.

Irrelevant stimulus processing in ADHD: catecholamine dynamics and attentional 
networks.

Aboitiz F(1), Ossandón T(1), Zamorano F(2), Palma B(3), Carrasco X(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Medical School, Centro Interdisciplinario de 
Neurociencia, Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile Santiago, Chile.
(2)División de Neurociencia, Centro de Investigación en Complejidad Social, 
Facultad de Gobierno, Universidad del Desarrollo Santiago, Chile.
(3)Programa de Doctorado en Psicoterapia, Pontificia Universidad Católica de 
Chile Santiago, Chile.
(4)Servicio de Neurología y Psiquiatría, Hospital de Niños Dr. Luis Calvo 
Mackenna, Facultad de Medicina, Universidad de Chile Santiago, Chile.

A cardinal symptom of attention deficit and hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) is a 
general distractibility where children and adults shift their attentional focus 
to stimuli that are irrelevant to the ongoing behavior. This has been attributed 
to a deficit in dopaminergic signaling in cortico-striatal networks that 
regulate goal-directed behavior. Furthermore, recent imaging evidence points to 
an impairment of large scale, antagonistic brain networks that normally 
contribute to attentional engagement and disengagement, such as the 
task-positive networks and the default mode network (DMN). Related networks are 
the ventral attentional network (VAN) involved in attentional shifting, and the 
salience network (SN) related to task expectancy. Here we discuss the 
tonic-phasic dynamics of catecholaminergic signaling in the brain, and attempt 
to provide a link between this and the activities of the large-scale cortical 
networks that regulate behavior. More specifically, we propose that a disbalance 
of tonic catecholamine levels during task performance produces an emphasis of 
phasic signaling and increased excitability of the VAN, yielding distractibility 
symptoms. Likewise, immaturity of the SN may relate to abnormal tonic signaling 
and an incapacity to build up a proper executive system during task performance. 
We discuss different lines of evidence including pharmacology, brain imaging and 
electrophysiology, that are consistent with our proposal. Finally, restoring the 
pharmacodynamics of catecholaminergic signaling seems crucial to alleviate ADHD 
symptoms; however, the possibility is open to explore cognitive rehabilitation 
strategies to top-down modulate network dynamics compensating the 
pharmacological deficits.

DOI: 10.3389/fpsyg.2014.00183
PMCID: PMC3972460
PMID: 24723897


531. Sci Rep. 2026 Feb 18. doi: 10.1038/s41598-026-39996-1. Online ahead of print.

Midlife modulation of task switching brain activity reveals age specific neural 
adaptation.

Wu MT(1)(2), Goh JO(3)(4)(5)(6), Chou TL(4)(5), Chang YL(3)(4)(5)(6), Tang 
PF(7)(8)(9)(10)(11).

Author information:
(1)School and Graduate Institute of Physical Therapy, College of Medicine, 
National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan.
(2)Post Baccalaureate Medicine, Kaohsiung Medical University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan.
(3)Graduate Institute of Brain and Mind Sciences, College of Medicine, National 
Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan.
(4)Department of Psychology, College of Science, National Taiwan University, 
Taipei, Taiwan.
(5)Neurobiology and Cognitive Science Center, National Taiwan University, 
Taipei, Taiwan.
(6)Center for Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, National Taiwan University, 
Taipei, Taiwan.
(7)School and Graduate Institute of Physical Therapy, College of Medicine, 
National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan. pftang@ntu.edu.tw.
(8)Graduate Institute of Brain and Mind Sciences, College of Medicine, National 
Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan. pftang@ntu.edu.tw.
(9)Neurobiology and Cognitive Science Center, National Taiwan University, 
Taipei, Taiwan. pftang@ntu.edu.tw.
(10)Center for Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, National Taiwan University, 
Taipei, Taiwan. pftang@ntu.edu.tw.
(11)Department of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, National Taiwan 
University Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan. pftang@ntu.edu.tw.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-026-39996-1
PMID: 41708725

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Competing interests: The authors 
declare no competing interests. Ethics approval and consent to participate: The 
study protocol was approved by the Research Ethics Committee of National Taiwan 
University Hospital (NTUH-REC No. 201212161RIND). All participants provided 
written informed consent prior to participating in the study.


532. Neuroimage. 2016 Nov 15;142:163-171. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2016.05.080. Epub 
2016 Jun 1.

The neurophysiological basis of reward effects on backward inhibition processes.

Zhang R(1), Stock AK(2), Beste C(3).

Author information:
(1)Cognitive Neurophysiology, Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 
Faculty of Medicine of the TU Dresden, Germany. Electronic address: 
rui.zhang@uniklinikum-dresden.de.
(2)Cognitive Neurophysiology, Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 
Faculty of Medicine of the TU Dresden, Germany. Electronic address: 
Ann-Kathrin.Stock@uniklinikum-dresden.de.
(3)Cognitive Neurophysiology, Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 
Faculty of Medicine of the TU Dresden, Germany; Experimental Neurobiology, 
National Institute of Mental Health, Klecany, Czech Republic. Electronic 
address: Christian.Beste@uniklinikum-dresden.de.

The ability to flexibly switch between tasks is an important faculty in daily 
life. One process that has been suggested to be an important aspect of flexible 
task switching is the inhibition of a recently performed task. This is called 
backward inhibition. Several studies suggest that task switching performance can 
be enhanced by rewards. However, it is less clear in how far backward inhibition 
mechanisms are also affected by rewards, especially when it comes to the 
neuronal mechanisms underlying reward-related modulations of backward 
inhibition. We therefore investigated this using a system neurophysiological 
approach combining EEG recordings with source localization techniques. We 
demonstrate that rewards reduce the strength of backward inhibition processes. 
The neurophysiological data shows that these reward-related effects emerge from 
response and/or conflict monitoring processes within medial frontal cortical 
structures. Upstream processes of perceptual gating and attentional selection, 
as well as downstream processes of context updating and stimulus-response 
mapping are not modulated by reward, even though they also play a role in 
backward inhibition effects.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2016.05.080
PMID: 27262242 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


533. Neuroimage. 2019 Sep;198:104-113. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2019.05.045. Epub 
2019 May 18.

The relation between brain signal complexity and task difficulty on an executive 
function task.

Grundy JG(1), Barker RM(2), Anderson JAE(3), Shedden JM(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Iowa State University, Ames, IA, USA. Electronic 
address: grundy@iastate.edu.
(2)Department of Psychology, University of Toronto & Rotman Research Institute, 
Baycrest Hospital, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(3)Krembil Family Imaging and Genetics Lab, Centre for Addiction and Mental 
Health, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(4)Department of Psychology, Neuroscience & Behaviour, McMaster University, 
Hamilton, ON, Canada.

On a daily basis, we constantly deal with changing environmental cues and 
perceptual conflicts and as such, our brains must flexibly adapt to current 
demands in order to act appropriately. Brains become more efficient and are able 
to switch states more readily by increasing the complexity of their neural 
networks. However, it is unclear how brain signal complexity relates to behavior 
in young adults performing cognitively demanding executive function tasks. Here 
we used multiscale entropy analysis and multivariate statistics on EEG data 
while participants performed a bivalency effect task-switching paradigm to show 
that brain signal complexity in young adults increases as task demands increase, 
that increases in brain signal complexity are associated with both speed gains 
and losses depending on scalp location, and that more difficult tasks are 
associated with more circumscribed complexity across the scalp. Overall, these 
findings highlight a critical role for brain signal complexity in predicting 
behavior on an executive function task among young adults.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2019.05.045
PMID: 31112787 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


534. Front Aging Neurosci. 2023 Apr 20;15:1152582. doi: 10.3389/fnagi.2023.1152582. 
eCollection 2023.

Older adults compensate for switch, but not mixing costs, relative to younger 
adults on an intrinsically cued task switching experiment.

Eich TS(1), Langfield C(2), Sakhardande J(2), Gazes Y(2), Habeck C(2), Stern 
Y(2).

Author information:
(1)Leonard Davis School of Gerontology, University of Southern California, Los 
Angeles, CA, United States.
(2)Cognitive Neuroscience Division and The Taub Institute, Department of 
Neurology, Columbia University Medical Center, New York City, NY, United States.

INTRODUCTION: Aging negatively impacts the ability to rapidly and successfully 
switch between two or more tasks that have different rules or objectives. 
However, previous work has shown that the context impacts the extent of this 
age-related impairment: while there is relative age-related invariance when 
participants must rapidly switch back and forth between two simple tasks (often 
called "switch costs"), age-related differences emerge when the contexts changes 
from one in which only one task must be performed to one in which multiple tasks 
must be performed, but a trial-level switch is not required (e.g., task repeat 
trials within dual task blocks, often called "mixing costs"). Here, we explored 
these two kinds of costs behaviorally, and also investigated the neural 
correlates of these effects.
METHODS: Seventy-one younger adults and 175 older adults completed a 
task-switching experiment while they underwent fMRI brain imaging. We 
investigated the impact of age on behavioral performance and neural activity 
considering two types of potential costs: switch costs (dual-task switch trials 
minus dual-task non-switch trials), and mixing costs (dual-task non-switch minus 
single-task trials).
RESULTS: We replicated previous behavioral findings, with greater age associated 
with mixing, but not switch costs. Neurally, we found age-related compensatory 
activations for switch costs in the dorsal lateral prefrontal cortex, pars 
opercularis, superior temporal gyrus, and the posterior and anterior cingulate, 
but age-related under recruitment for mixing costs in fronto-parietal areas 
including the supramarginal gyrus and pre and supplemental motor areas.
DISCUSSION: These results suggest an age-based dissociation between executive 
components that contribute to task switching.

Copyright © 2023 Eich, Langfield, Sakhardande, Gazes, Habeck and Stern.

DOI: 10.3389/fnagi.2023.1152582
PMCID: PMC10158939
PMID: 37151844

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.


535. Prog Brain Res. 2016;229:189-212. doi: 10.1016/bs.pbr.2016.06.003. Epub 2016 Jul 
29.

Exploring individual differences in task switching: Persistence and other 
personality traits related to anterior cingulate cortex function.

Umemoto A(1), Holroyd CB(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Biomedical and Health Sciences, Hiroshima University, Hiroshima, 
Japan. Electronic address: akumemoto@gmail.com.
(2)University of Victoria, Victoria, BC, Canada.

Anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) is involved in cognitive control and 
decision-making but its precise function is still highly debated. Based on 
evidence from lesion, neurophysiological, and neuroimaging studies, we have 
recently proposed a critical role for ACC in motivating extended behaviors 
according to learned task values (Holroyd and Yeung, 2012). Computational 
simulations based on this theory suggest a hierarchical mechanism in which a 
caudal division of ACC selects and applies control over task execution, and a 
rostral division of ACC facilitates switches between tasks according to a higher 
task strategy (Holroyd and McClure, 2015). This theoretical framework suggests 
that ACC may contribute to personality traits related to persistence and reward 
sensitivity (Holroyd and Umemoto, 2016). To explore this possibility, we carried 
out a voluntary task switching experiment in which on each trial participants 
freely chose one of two tasks to perform, under the condition that they try to 
select the tasks "at random" and equally often. The participants also completed 
several questionnaires that assessed personality trait related to persistence, 
apathy, anhedonia, and rumination, in addition to the Big 5 personality 
inventory. Among other findings, we observed greater compliance with task 
instructions by persistent individuals, as manifested by a greater facility with 
switching between tasks, which is suggestive of increased engagement of rostral 
ACC.

© 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/bs.pbr.2016.06.003
PMID: 27926438 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


536. Brain Sci. 2024 Jan 27;14(2):134. doi: 10.3390/brainsci14020134.

Bilingual Spatial Cognition: Spatial Cue Use in Bilinguals and Monolinguals.

Tyborowska A(1)(2), Wegman J(1)(2), Janzen G(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Behavioural Science Institute, Radboud University Nijmegen, 6500 HE Nijmegen, 
The Netherlands.
(2)Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, Radboud University 
Nijmegen, 6500 HD Nijmegen, The Netherlands.

Structural plasticity changes and functional differences in executive control 
tasks have been reported in bilinguals compared to monolinguals, supporting a 
proposed bilingual 'advantage' in executive control functions (e.g., task 
switching) due to continual usage of control mechanisms that inhibit one of the 
coexisting languages. However, it remains unknown whether these differences are 
also apparent in the spatial domain. The present fMRI study explores the use of 
spatial cues in 15 bilinguals and 14 monolinguals while navigating in an 
open-field virtual environment. In each trial, participants had to navigate 
towards a target object that was visible during encoding but hidden in 
retrieval. An extensive network was activated in bilinguals compared to 
monolinguals in the encoding and retrieval phase. During encoding, bilinguals 
activated the right temporal and left parietal regions (object trials) and left 
inferior frontal, precentral, and lingual regions more than monolinguals. During 
retrieval, the same contrasts activated the left caudate nucleus and the right 
dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC), the left parahippocampal gyrus, as well 
as caudate regions. These results suggest that bilinguals may recruit neural 
networks known to subserve not only executive control processes but also spatial 
strategies.

DOI: 10.3390/brainsci14020134
PMCID: PMC10887090
PMID: 38391709

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.


537. Psychol Res. 2014 Mar;78(2):276-88. doi: 10.1007/s00426-013-0495-7. Epub 2013 
May 28.

Preparation time modulates pro-active control and enhances task conflict in task 
switching.

Kalanthroff E(1), Henik A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology and Zlotowski Center for Neuroscience, Ben-Gurion 
University of the Negev, P.O.B. 653, 84105, Beersheba, Israel, 
eyalkala@post.bgu.ac.il.

Performance in the Stroop task reflects two conflicts--informational (between 
the incongruent word and ink color) and task (between relevant color naming and 
irrelevant word reading). Neuroimaging findings support the existence of task 
conflict in congruent trials. A behavioral indication for task conflict--Stroop 
reverse facilitation--was found in previous studies under low task-control 
conditions. Task switching also causes reduction in task control because the 
task set frequently changes. We hypothesized that it would be harder to 
efficiently manage task conflicts in switching situations and, specifically, as 
cue-target interval (CTI) decreases. This suggestion was examined in two 
experiments using a combined Stroop task-switching design. We found a large 
interference effect and reverse facilitation that decreased with elongation of 
CTI. Results imply that task switching reduces pro-active task control and 
thereby enhances the informational and the task conflicts. This calls for a 
revision of recent control models to include task conflict.

DOI: 10.1007/s00426-013-0495-7
PMID: 23712333 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


538. Neuroimage Rep. 2024 Nov 19;4(4):100228. doi: 10.1016/j.ynirp.2024.100228. 
eCollection 2024 Dec.

Measuring cognitive load in multitasking using mobile fNIRS.

Boere K(1), Anderson F(1), Hecker KG(2), Krigolson OE(1).

Author information:
(1)Theoretical and Applied Neuroscience Laboratory, The University of Victoria, 
Victoria, Canada.
(2)The Health Education Neuroassessment Laboratory, The University of Calgary, 
Calgary, Canada.

Cognitive load, or the mental effort required to process and retain information, 
is a critical factor in high-stakes environments where task demands often exceed 
working memory capacity, leading to performance declines and errors. However, 
most cognitive load research has relied on controlled, single-task paradigms, 
limiting its applicability to real-world multitasking situations. Addressing 
this gap, we used a mobile, two-channel functional near-infrared spectroscopy 
(fNIRS) device to measure cognitive load in a complex multitasking environment, 
simulating real-world cognitive demands. Thirty-one undergraduate participants 
engaged in single-task and multitask conditions to simulate real-world cognitive 
demands. Results showed that subjective cognitive load ratings were higher, 
performance scores were lower, and error rates increased in the multitask 
condition compared to the single-task condition. However, contrary to 
expectations, prefrontal cortex activation did not increase in the multitask 
condition, suggesting a "cognitive disengagement" effect, where the brain limits 
engagement to manage overload. This finding challenges the traditional 
one-to-one association between cognitive load and prefrontal activation, as seen 
in simpler validation studies. Our study highlights the value of mobile fNIRS 
for assessing cognitive load in ecologically valid settings and provides 
insights that could inform strategies for optimizing performance in high-stakes 
environments like aviation and healthcare.

© 2024 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ynirp.2024.100228
PMCID: PMC12172848
PMID: 40568357

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known 
competing interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to 
influence the work reported in this paper.


539. Neuroimage Clin. 2023;37:103297. doi: 10.1016/j.nicl.2022.103297. Epub 2022 Dec 
19.

Cognitive flexibility in post-traumatic stress disorder: Sustained interference 
associated with altered modulation of cortical oscillatory activity during 
task-switching.

Popescu M(1), Popescu EA(1), DeGraba TJ(1), Hughes JD(2).

Author information:
(1)National Intrepid Center of Excellence, Walter Reed National Military Medical 
Center, Bethesda, MD, USA.
(2)National Intrepid Center of Excellence, Walter Reed National Military Medical 
Center, Bethesda, MD, USA; Behavioral Biology Branch, Walter Reed Army Institute 
of Research, Silver Spring, MD, USA. Electronic address: 
john.d.hughes4.civ@health.mil.

Post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is associated with deficits in cognitive 
flexibility, with evidence suggesting that these deficits may be a risk factor 
for the development of core PTSD symptoms. Understanding the neurophysiological 
substrate of this association could aid the development of effective therapies 
for PTSD. In this study, we investigated the relationship between post-traumatic 
stress severity (PTSS) in service members with combat exposure and the 
modulation of cortical oscillatory activity during a test of cognitive 
flexibility. Participants were assigned to three groups based on PTSS scores: 
low (well below a threshold consistent with a diagnosis of PTSD, n = 30), 
moderate (n = 32), and high (n = 29) symptom severity. Magnetoencephalography 
data were recorded while participants performed a cued rule-switching task in 
which two matching rules were repeated or switched across consecutive trials. 
Participants with high PTSS had longer reaction times for both switch and repeat 
trials, and showed evidence of sustained residual interference during repeat 
trials. During the cue-stimulus interval, participants with moderate and high 
PTSS showed higher relative theta power in switch trials over left dorsolateral 
prefrontal cortex (DLPFC). After test-stimulus onset, participants with high 
PTSS showed less suppression of beta band activity, which was present over 
multiple prefrontal, parietal, and temporal regions in switch trials, but it was 
confined to ventromedial prefrontal cortex in repeat trials. Higher theta band 
activity is a marker of effortful voluntary shifting of attention, while lower 
suppression of beta band activity reflects difficulties with inhibition of 
competing perceptual information and courses of action. These findings are 
consistent with a role for altered suppression of beta band activity, which can 
be due to less effective top-down bias signals exerted by DLPFC, in the etiology 
of cognitive flexibility deficits in PTSD.

Copyright © 2022. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.nicl.2022.103297
PMCID: PMC9795531
PMID: 36563647 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.


540. Neuroimage. 2011 Apr 1;55(3):1384-92. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2010.12.059. 
Epub 2011 Jan 4.

Effects of task-set adoption on ERP correlates of controlled and automatic 
recognition memory.

Wilckens KA(1), Tremel JJ, Wolk DA, Wheeler ME.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, USA. 
krw37@pitt.edu

Successful memory retrieval depends not only on memory fidelity but also on the 
mental preparedness on the part of the subject. ERP studies of recognition 
memory have identified two topographically distinct ERP components, the FN400 
old/new effect and the late posterior component (LPC) old/new effect, commonly 
associated with familiarity and recollection, respectively. Here we used a 
task-switching paradigm to examine the extent to which adoption of a retrieval 
task-set influences FN400 and LPC old/new effects, in light of the presumption 
that recollection, as a control process, relies on the adoption of a retrieval 
task-set, but that familiarity-based retrieval does not. Behavioral accuracy 
indicated that source memory (experiment 2), but not item recognition 
(experiment 1), improved with task-set adoption. ERP data demonstrated a larger 
LPC on stay trials when a task-set had been adopted even with a simple 
recognition memory judgment. We conclude that adopting a retrieval task-set 
impacts recollection memory but not familiarity. These data indicate that 
attentional state immediately prior to retrieval can influence objective 
measures of recollection memory.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2010.12.059
PMCID: PMC3049819
PMID: 21211568 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


541. J Vis Exp. 2015 Feb 4;(96):51944. doi: 10.3791/51944.

The attentional set shifting task: a measure of cognitive flexibility in mice.

Heisler JM(1), Morales J(1), Donegan JJ(1), Jett JD(1), Redus L(1), O'Connor 
JC(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Texas Health Science Center at San 
Antonio.
(2)Department of Pharmacology, University of Texas Health Science Center at San 
Antonio; Audie L. Murphy VA Hospital, South Texas Veteran's Health Care System; 
oconnorj@uthscsa.edu.

Cognitive impairment, particularly involving dysfunction of circuitry within the 
prefrontal cortex (PFC), represents a core feature of many neuropsychiatric and 
neurodevelopmental disorders, including depression, post-traumatic stress 
disorder, schizophrenia and autism spectrum disorder. Deficits in cognitive 
function also represent the most difficult symptom domain to successfully treat, 
as serotonin reuptake inhibitors and tricyclic antidepressants have only modest 
effects. Functional neuroimaging studies and postmortem analysis of human brain 
tissue implicate the PFC as being a primary region of dysregulation in patients 
with these disorders. However, preclinical behavioral assays used to assess 
these deficits in mouse models which can be readily manipulated genetically and 
could provide the basis for studies of new treatment avenues have been 
underutilized. Here we describe the adaptation of a behavioral assay, the 
attentional set shifting task (AST), to be performed in mice to assess 
prefrontal cortex mediated cognitive deficits. The neural circuits underlying 
behavior during the AST are highly conserved across humans, nonhuman primates 
and rodents, providing excellent face, construct and predictive validity.

DOI: 10.3791/51944
PMCID: PMC4354620
PMID: 25741905 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


542. J Gerontol B Psychol Sci Soc Sci. 2023 May 26;78(6):977-986. doi: 
10.1093/geronb/gbad024.

Assessing Flexibility of Solution Strategy: Strategy Shifting as a Measure of 
Cognitive Reserve.

Barulli D(1), Habeck C(1), Stern Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Cognitive Neuroscience Division, Department of Neurology, Columbia University 
Irving Medical Center, New York, New York, USA.

OBJECTIVES: This series of experiments explores whether flexibility in strategy 
shifting might function as an expression of cognitive reserve (CR).
METHODS: A reasoning task was designed using matrix reasoning stimuli that each 
required 1 of 2 specific solution strategies: logicoanalytic and visuospatial. 
It was formatted as a task-switching paradigm, assessing the ability to switch 
between solution strategies as measured by switch costs. Study 1 was done on 
Amazon Mechanical Turk and included an assessment of CR proxies. Study 2 used 
participants who had been studied extensively with neuropsychological 
assessments and structural neuroimaging.
RESULTS: Study 1 found that switch costs increased with aging. In addition, a 
relationship between switch costs and CR proxies was noted, suggesting a 
relationship between the flexibility of strategy shifting and CR. The results of 
Study 2 again indicated that age negatively affected strategy-shifting 
flexibility, but that individuals with higher CR as measured with standard 
proxies performed better. The flexibility measure accounted for additional 
variance in cognitive performance over that explained by cortical thickness, 
suggesting that it may contribute to CR.
DISCUSSION: Overall, the results are consistent with the idea that flexibility 
in strategy shifting might be 1 cognitive process that underlies cognitive 
reserve.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of The 
Gerontological Society of America. All rights reserved. For permissions, please 
e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/geronb/gbad024
PMCID: PMC10214656
PMID: 36869706 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: None declared.


543. Neuroscience. 2016 Jan 28;313:92-8. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2015.11.050. 
Epub 2015 Nov 26.

Enhancing switching abilities: Improving practice effect by stimulating the 
dorsolateral pre frontal cortex.

Tayeb Y(1), Lavidor M(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology and the Gonda Brain Research Center, Bar Ilan 
University, Israel.
(2)Department of Psychology and the Gonda Brain Research Center, Bar Ilan 
University, Israel. Electronic address: Michal.lavidor@gmail.com.

Task switching is our ability to abandon an old, irrelevant task in order to 
perform a new, more relevant one. Data from neuropsychology and neuroimaging 
studies indicate hemispheric asymmetries in task switching, however the neural 
mechanisms subtending switching, and in particular protocols to improve 
switching abilities are yet to be established. The present study aimed to assess 
hemispheric asymmetry and practice effects in task switching by using 
transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS). To this end, tDCS has been 
applied to the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC) of both hemispheres while 
subjects were performing a well-established task-switching paradigm. The task 
was repeated three times in three separate sessions in order to test practice 
effects with and without stimulation. Results show that increased hemispheric 
asymmetry in dorsolateral prefrontal areas improved switching performance as 
measured by a better practice effect, compared to sham condition. Our results 
support the hypothesis of dynamic hemispheric asymmetry in task switching and 
reinforce the notion of utilizing brain stimulation with traditional training 
methods in order to enhance cognitive abilities.

Copyright © 2015 IBRO. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2015.11.050
PMID: 26628401 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


544. Imaging Neurosci (Camb). 2026 Jan 6;4:IMAG.a.1084. doi: 10.1162/IMAG.a.1084. 
eCollection 2026.

Cognitive sequences in obsessive-compulsive disorder are supported by frontal 
cortex ramping activity.

Doyle H(1), McLaughlin NCR(2)(3), Garnaat SL(2)(3)(4), Desrochers TM(1)(2)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Brown University, Providence, RI, United States.
(2)Department of Psychiatry and Human Behavior, Alpert Medical School of Brown 
University, Providence, RI, United States.
(3)Butler Hospital, Providence, RI, United States.
(4)Department of Psychiatry, Geisel School of Medicine at Dartmouth College & 
Dartmouth-Hitchcock Medical Center, Hanover, NH, United States.
(5)Robert J. and Nancy D. Carney Institute for Brain Sciences, Brown University, 
Providence, RI, United States.

Update of
    bioRxiv. 2024 Sep 11:2024.07.28.605508. doi: 10.1101/2024.07.28.605508.

Completing sequences is a routine part of daily life. Many are abstract, defined 
by a rule governing the order rather than the identity of individual steps 
(e.g., getting dressed). In obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD), excessive 
ritualistic behaviors suggest a disruption in abstract sequence completion. 
Executing abstract sequences requires at least two levels in a hierarchy of 
cognitive control: abstract sequential control (tracking steps) and task 
switching (shifting between tasks). While task switching has been studied in 
OCD, little is known in a sequential context. Understanding both hierarchical 
control types is key to uncovering how abstract sequences with nested task 
switches are processed in OCD. Previous studies showed that the rostrolateral 
prefrontal cortex (RLPFC) supports abstract sequence monitoring in healthy 
individuals with an increase in activity across each sequence, a dynamic known 
as "ramping". Ramping outside the RLPFC is potentially indicative of other 
sequence-related processes such as progress toward a goal and increasing working 
memory load. Therefore, we hypothesized that abstract sequential control 
deficits would correspond to altered ramping dynamics in RLPFC and other 
cortical regions. Second, we predicted task switching deficits in OCD, coupled 
with altered activity in cortical regions canonically implicated in task level 
control. We found partial support for both hypotheses. Abstract sequential 
control did not show behavioral differences in OCD but did show increased 
overall ramping in the anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) and superior frontal 
sulcus (SFS) and ramping differences in additional, novel cortical regions 
according to abstract sequence complexity. In contrast, behavioral differences 
were observed for task switching in OCD without neural differences between the 
groups. Together, these results suggest a group of areas support sequential 
control differentially in OCD than in healthy controls, despite behavioral 
similarity, and that this observation is likely not the result of neural 
deficits in task switching. These findings, thus, provide insight into OCD 
during complex behaviors more similar to daily life where sequence and task 
level control are intertwined and may inform future potential treatment.

© 2025 The Authors. Published under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 
International (CC BY 4.0) license.

DOI: 10.1162/IMAG.a.1084
PMCID: PMC12776618
PMID: 41510520

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interests.


545. Data Brief. 2018 May 18;19:997-1007. doi: 10.1016/j.dib.2018.05.059. eCollection 
2018 Aug.

Functional magnetic neuroimaging data on age-related differences in task 
switching accuracy and reverse brain-behavior relationships.

Basak C(1)(2), Qin S(1)(2), Nashiro K(3), O'Connell MA(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)School of Behavioral and Brain Sciences, University of Texas at Dallas, 
United States.
(2)Center for Vital Longevity, University of Texas at Dallas, United States.
(3)University of Southern California, United States.

The data presented in this article is related to the research article entitled 
"Age-related Differences in BOLD Modulation to Cognitive Control Costs in a 
Multitasking Paradigm: Global Switch, Local Switch, and Compatibility-Switch 
Costs" (Nashiro et al., 2018) [1]. This article describes age-related 
differences in accuracies for various cognitive costs incurred during task 
switching across three different age-cohorts: younger (18-35 years), younger-old 
(50-64 years) and older-old (65-80 years). The cognitive costs evaluated were 
global switch costs (GSC), local switch costs (LSC) and compatibility switch 
costs (CSC). Whole brain analyses were conducted to determine the brain regions 
sensitive to these cognitive costs, irrespective of age. Furthermore, 
age-related differences in brain-behavior relationships were evaluated by 
correlating activations from these regions with global switch costs, indexed by 
both response times and accuracies, for younger and older adults separately. 
Activations of age-sensitive regions during the task, where younger adults 
activated more than the combined groups of older adults, were also correlated 
with response times and accuracies to determine age-related differences in 
brain-behavior relationships of these under-recruited brain regions by older 
adults.

DOI: 10.1016/j.dib.2018.05.059
PMCID: PMC5997903
PMID: 29900396


546. Neurophotonics. 2019 Apr;6(2):025011. doi: 10.1117/1.NPh.6.2.025011. Epub 2019 
Jun 8.

Functional near-infrared spectroscopy-informed neurofeedback: regional-specific 
modulation of lateral orbitofrontal activation and cognitive flexibility.

Li K(1), Jiang Y(2), Gong Y(2), Zhao W(1), Zhao Z(1), Liu X(1), Kendrick KM(1), 
Zhu C(2)(3)(4), Becker B(1).

Author information:
(1)University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, The Clinical 
Hospital of Chengdu Brain Science Institute, MOE Key Laboratory for 
Neuroinformation, Chengdu, China.
(2)Beijing Normal University, State Key Laboratory of Cognitive Neuroscience and 
Learning, Beijing, China.
(3)Beijing Normal University, IDG/McGovern Institute for Brain Research, 
Beijing, China.
(4)Beijing Normal University, Center for Collaboration and Innovation in Brain 
and Learning Sciences, Beijing, China.

Cognitive flexibility and reward processing critically rely on the orbitofrontal 
cortex (OFC). Dysregulations in these domains and orbitofrontal activation have 
been reported in major psychiatric disorders. Hemodynamic brain imaging-informed 
neurofeedback allows regional-specific control over brain activation and thus 
may represent an innovative intervention to regulate orbitofrontal dysfunctions. 
Against this background the present proof-of-concept study evaluates the 
feasibility and behavioral relevance of functional near-infrared spectroscopy 
(fNIRS)-assisted neurofeedback training of the lateral orbitofrontal cortex 
(lOFC). In a randomized sham-controlled between-subject design, 60 healthy 
participants have undergone four subsequent runs of training to enhance the lOFC 
activation. Training-induced changes in the lOFC, attentional set-shifting 
performance, and reward experience have served as primary outcomes. Feedback 
from the target channel significantly increases the regional-specific lOFC 
activation over the four training runs in comparison with sham neurofeedback. 
The real-time OFC neurofeedback group demonstrates a trend for faster responses 
during the set-shifting relative to the sham neurofeedback group. Within the 
real-time OFC neurofeedback group, stronger training-induced lOFC increases are 
associated with higher reward experience. The present results demonstrate that 
fNIRS-informed neurofeedback allows regional-specific regulation of lOFC 
activation and may have the potential to modulate the associated behavioral 
domains. As such fNIRS-informed neurofeedback may represent a promising strategy 
to regulate OFC dysfunctions in psychiatric disorders.

© The Authors. Published by SPIE under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 
Unported License. Distribution or reproduction of this work in whole or in part 
requires full attribution of the original publication, including its DOI.

DOI: 10.1117/1.NPh.6.2.025011
PMCID: PMC6951484
PMID: 31930153


547. Front Psychol. 2022 Jan 14;12:800543. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2021.800543. 
eCollection 2021.

Viewing Cute Images Does Not Affect Performance of Computerized Reaction Time 
Tasks.

Ziv G(1), Fox O(1).

Author information:
(1)Motor Behavior Laboratory, The Academic College at Wingate, Netanya, Israel.

Humans are emotionally affected by cute or infantile appearances, typical of 
baby animals and humans, which in turn often leads to careful and cautious 
behavior. The purpose of this pre-registered study was to examine whether 
looking at cute images of baby pets improves performance of computerized 
cognitive-motor tasks. Ninety-eight participants were recruited for this online 
study and were randomly assigned to two experimental groups. The participants in 
one group performed two cognitive-motor tasks (Simon task and alternate 
task-switching task) before and after viewing images of adult pets and the 
participants in the other group performed the tasks before and after viewing 
images of baby pets. The participants who viewed images of baby pets rated them 
as significantly cuter (Cohen's d = 0.50) and more infantile (Cohen's d = 1.56) 
compared with those who viewed images of adult pets. All participants improved 
their performance from the pre-test to the post-test, but no differences in 
correct responses and reaction times were seen between the groups. However, pet 
ownership appeared to serve as a moderating variable with pet owners performing 
the Simon task faster than non-pet owners. In addition, pet owners reacted 
faster in the alternate task-switching task after viewing cute and infantile 
images but not after viewing images of adult pets. This effect was not found 
among non-pet owners. In conclusion, this study did not find that viewing cute 
images improves cognitive-motor performance, yet this may be dependent on 
moderators like pet ownership.

Copyright © 2022 Ziv and Fox.

DOI: 10.3389/fpsyg.2021.800543
PMCID: PMC8795710
PMID: 35095686

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.


548. Brain Lang. 2021 Nov;222:105026. doi: 10.1016/j.bandl.2021.105026. Epub 2021 Sep 
28.

Bilingual language entropy influences executive functions through functional 
connectivity and signal variability.

Li X(1), Ng KK(2), Wong JJY(2), Lee JW(1), Zhou JH(3), Yow WQ(4).

Author information:
(1)Humanities, Arts and Social Sciences, Singapore University of Technology and 
Design, Singapore.
(2)Centre for Sleep and Cognition, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National 
University of Singapore, Singapore.
(3)Centre for Sleep and Cognition, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National 
University of Singapore, Singapore; Centre for Translational Magnetic Resonance 
Research, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National University of Singapore, 
Singapore; Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, National 
University of Singapore, Singapore; Integrative Sciences and Engineering 
Programme (ISEP), National University of Singapore, Singapore. Electronic 
address: helen.zhou@nus.edu.sg.
(4)Humanities, Arts and Social Sciences, Singapore University of Technology and 
Design, Singapore. Electronic address: quin@sutd.edu.sg.

How bilinguals' experience in managing multiple languages in different 
communicative contexts influences the cognitive and neural aspects of executive 
functions remains unclear. Therefore, we examined whether variations in language 
experience in young adult bilinguals were associated with data-driven brain 
functional network patterns (connectivity and signal variability) defined by 
performance during executive control tasks (Stroop and task-switching). Multiple 
aspects of language experience, such as the extent of balanced bilingualism in 
language proficiency and usage, and language diversity across social contexts 
(i.e., language entropy) were assessed. We found that greater language 
diversity, rather than balanced bilingualism per se, was related to higher brain 
network specialization and segregation concentrated on the default mode and 
executive control networks, and lower signal variability, a pattern linked to 
smaller RT-indices related to executive functioning of shifting, 
goal-maintenance, and conflict-monitoring. Our findings underscore the important 
role of language diversity in influencing bilinguals' neurocognitive 
characteristics of executive functioning.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bandl.2021.105026
PMID: 34597903 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


549. J Cogn Neurosci. 2003 Apr 1;15(3):338-53. doi: 10.1162/089892903321593072.

The effect of cingulate cortex lesions on task switching and working memory.

Rushworth MF(1), Hadland KA, Gaffan D, Passingham RE.

Author information:
(1)University of Oxford, UK. matthew.rushworth@psy.ox.ac.uk

Anatomic interconnections between the prefrontal and anterior cingulate cortices 
suggest that these areas may have similar functions. Here we report the effect 
of anterior cingulate removal on task switching, error monitoring, and working 
memory. Neuroimaging studies have implicated the cingulate cortex in all these 
processes. Six macaques were taught task switching (TS) and delayed alternation 
(DA) paradigms. TS required switching between two conditional response tasks 
with mutually incompatible response selection rules. DA required alternation 
between two identically covered food-well positions. In the first set of 
experiments, anterior cingulate lesions did not consistently impair TS or DA 
performance. One animal performed worst on both TS and DA and in this animal the 
cingulate sulcus lesion was most complete. In the second set of experiments, we 
confirmed that larger anterior cingulate lesions, which included the sulcus, 
consistently impaired TS but only led to a mild and equivocal impairment of DA. 
The TS error pattern, however, did not suggest an impairment of TS per se. The 
consequence of a cingulate lesion is, therefore, distinct to that of a 
prefrontal lesion. TS error distribution analyses provided some support for a 
cingulate role in monitoring responses for errors and subsequent correction but 
the pattern of reaction time change in TS was also indicative of a failure to 
sustain attention to the task and the responses being made.

DOI: 10.1162/089892903321593072
PMID: 12729487 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


550. Curr Opin Neurobiol. 2011 Jun;21(3):402-7. doi: 10.1016/j.conb.2011.04.002. Epub 
2011 Apr 29.

Dopaminergic control of the striatum for high-level cognition.

Cools R(1).

Author information:
(1)Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Donders Institute for Brain, 
Cognition and Behaviour, Centre for Cognitive Neuroimaging & Department of 
Psychiatry, Nijmegen, The Netherlands. roshan.cools@gmail.com

Dopamine has long been implicated in a wide variety of high-level cognitive 
processes, ranging from working memory to rule learning and attention switching. 
Notable progress has been made in the past decades, but the mechanisms 
underlying effects of dopamine on high-level cognition remain unclear. This 
article reviews evidence for an important role of the striatum and its 
interaction with the prefrontal cortex and suggests a variety of ways by which 
changes in dopamine transmission can bias high-level cognition.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.conb.2011.04.002
PMID: 21531543 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


551. Neuroimage. 2012 Feb 15;59(4):3339-46. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2011.11.073. 
Epub 2011 Dec 6.

Aberrant reward processing in Parkinson's disease is associated with dopamine 
cell loss.

Aarts E(1), Helmich RC, Janssen MJ, Oyen WJ, Bloem BR, Cools R.

Author information:
(1)Radboud University Nijmegen, Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and 
Behavior, Kapittelweg 29, 6525 EN Nijmegen, The Netherlands. 
Aarts.Esther@gmail.com

Dopamine has been implicated in reward-related impulsivity, but the exact 
relationship between dopamine, reward and impulsivity in humans remains unknown. 
We address this question in Parkinson's disease (PD), which is characterized by 
severe dopamine depletion. PD is associated primarily with motor and cognitive 
inflexibility, but can also be accompanied by reward-related impulsivity. This 
paradoxical symptom of PD has often been attributed to dopaminergic 
overstimulation by antiparkinson medication, which is necessary to relieve the 
motor and cognitive inflexibility. However, factors other than medication may 
also contribute to aberrant impact of reward. Here we assess whether cognitive 
inflexibility and aberrant reward impact in PD are two sides of the same coin, 
namely dopamine cell loss. To measure dopamine cell loss, we employed 
(123)I-FP-CIT Single Photon Emission Computed Tomography (SPECT) in 32 PD 
patients (10 never-medicated patients and 22 patients after withdrawal of all 
medication for >12h) and related the values to behavior on a rewarded 
task-switching paradigm. Dopamine cell loss was associated not only with 
cognitive inflexibility (under low reward), but also with aberrant impact of 
reward. These effects could not be attributed to medication use. Relative to 
controls (n=26), aberrant reward processing in PD was particularly expressed as 
reduced capacity to maintain (i.e., repeat) the current task-set under high 
reward. Our findings demonstrate that factors intrinsically related to PD may 
underlie the paradoxical symptoms of inflexibility and reward-related 
impulsivity in PD. The present results concur with observations that low 
baseline dopamine states predispose to drug and other addictions.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2011.11.073
PMID: 22166793 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


552. Neuroimage Rep. 2022 Nov 9;2(4):100144. doi: 10.1016/j.ynirp.2022.100144. 
eCollection 2022 Dec.

Dynamic functional connectivity associated with prospective memory success in 
children.

Hashimoto T(1), Yokota S(2), Umeda S(3), Kawashima R(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Developmental Cognitive Neuroscience, Institute of Development, 
Aging and Cancer, Tohoku University, 4-1 Seiryomachi, Aobaku, 980-8575, Sendai, 
Japan.
(2)Kyushu University, Faculty of Art and Science, 744 Motoaka, Nisiku, 819-0395, 
Fukuoka, Japan.
(3)Department of Psychology, Keio University, 2-15-45 Mita, Minatoku, 108-8345, 
Tokyo, Japan.

To remember the prospective intention successfully, going back and forth between 
the background task and the intention, i.e., the dynamics of these multiple 
processes can be critical. An executive function like task switching has been 
associated with the success of prospective memory (PM) in children, but the 
neural mechanism of PM in children has not been investigated. The purpose of 
this study was to reveal the dynamic functional connectivity underlying the 
success of PM in children. Healthy 108 children, aged 7 to 15, were engaged in a 
single trial PM task, with a 30-min delay. Temporal variabilities in their 
resting-state functional connectivity were analyzed, using sliding windows with 
seed regions of interest ROIs of the PM network. About 70% of children 
successfully remembered the intention; they showed greater dynamics in neural 
connectivity between the right dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC) and 
intraparietal sulcus, and between the right DLPFC and insula as compared to 
children with PM failure. Everyday activities and the usual attention to ongoing 
processes can be associated with alertness in the right frontoparietal network 
and internal-state monitoring in the insula network, and those dynamics might be 
associated with one-time event PM success in children.

© 2022 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ynirp.2022.100144
PMCID: PMC12172931
PMID: 40567559

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


553. Front Aging Neurosci. 2014 Mar 18;6:46. doi: 10.3389/fnagi.2014.00046. 
eCollection 2014.

Neuroimaging explanations of age-related differences in task performance.

Steffener J(1), Barulli D(2), Habeck C(1), Stern Y(3).

Author information:
(1)Cognitive Neuroscience Division of the Taub Institute for Research on 
Alzheimer's Disease and the Aging Brain, Columbia University College of 
Physicians and Surgeons New York, NY, USA ; Department of Neurology, Columbia 
University of Physicians and Surgeons New York, NY, USA.
(2)Cognitive Neuroscience Division of the Taub Institute for Research on 
Alzheimer's Disease and the Aging Brain, Columbia University College of 
Physicians and Surgeons New York, NY, USA ; Department of Psychology, Columbia 
University New York, NY, USA.
(3)Cognitive Neuroscience Division of the Taub Institute for Research on 
Alzheimer's Disease and the Aging Brain, Columbia University College of 
Physicians and Surgeons New York, NY, USA ; Department of Neurology, Columbia 
University of Physicians and Surgeons New York, NY, USA ; Department of 
Psychiatry, Columbia University College of Physicians and Surgeons New York, NY, 
USA.

Advancing age affects both cognitive performance and functional brain activity 
and interpretation of these effects has led to a variety of conceptual research 
models without always explicitly linking the two effects. However, to best 
understand the multifaceted effects of advancing age, age differences in 
functional brain activity need to be explicitly tied to the cognitive task 
performance. This work hypothesized that age-related differences in task 
performance are partially explained by age-related differences in functional 
brain activity and formally tested these causal relationships. Functional MRI 
data was from groups of young and old adults engaged in an executive 
task-switching experiment. Analyses were voxel-wise testing of 
moderated-mediation and simple mediation statistical path models to determine 
whether age group, brain activity and their interaction explained task 
performance in regions demonstrating an effect of age group. Results identified 
brain regions whose age-related differences in functional brain activity 
significantly explained age-related differences in task performance. In all 
identified locations, significant moderated-mediation relationships resulted 
from increasing brain activity predicting worse (slower) task performance in 
older but not younger adults. Findings suggest that advancing age links task 
performance to the level of brain activity. The overall message of this work is 
that in order to understand the role of functional brain activity on cognitive 
performance, analysis methods should respect theoretical relationships. Namely, 
that age affects brain activity and brain activity is related to task 
performance.

DOI: 10.3389/fnagi.2014.00046
PMCID: PMC3957194
PMID: 24672481


554. Brain Res. 2010 Dec 2;1363:128-42. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2010.09.093. Epub 
2010 Oct 1.

Neural correlates of task switching in paternal 15q11-q13 deletion Prader-Willi 
syndrome.

Woodcock KA(1), Humphreys GW, Oliver C, Hansen PC.

Author information:
(1)Cerebra Centre for Neurodevelopmental Disorders, School of Psychology, 
University of Birmingham, B15 2TT UK. papers@katewoodcock.com

We report a first study of brain activity linked to task switching in 
individuals with Prader-Willi syndrome (PWS). PWS individuals show a specific 
cognitive deficit in task switching which may be associated with the display of 
temper outbursts and repetitive questioning. The performance of participants 
with PWS and typically developing controls was matched in a cued task switching 
procedure, and brain activity was contrasted on switching and non-switching 
blocks using fMRI. Individuals with PWS did not show the typical 
frontal-parietal pattern of neural activity associated with switching blocks, 
with significantly reduced activation in regions of the posterior parietal and 
ventromedial prefrontal cortices. We suggest that this is linked to a difficulty 
in PWS in setting appropriate attentional weights to enable task-set 
reconfiguration. In addition to this, PWS individuals did not show the typical 
pattern of deactivation, with significantly less deactivation in an anterior 
region of the ventromedial prefrontal cortex. One plausible explanation for this 
is that individuals with PWS show dysfunction within the default mode network, 
which has been linked to attentional control. The data point to functional 
changes in the neural circuitry supporting task switching in PWS even when 
behavioural performance is matched to controls and thus highlight neural 
mechanisms that may be involved in a specific pathway between genes, cognition 
and behaviour.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.brainres.2010.09.093
PMID: 20920489 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


555. Biomed Eng Online. 2020 Jun 12;19(1):45. doi: 10.1186/s12938-020-00787-y.

A computational paradigm for real-time MEG neurofeedback for dynamic allocation 
of spatial attention.

Rana KD(1)(2), Khan S(3)(4)(5), Hämäläinen MS(6)(7), Vaina LM(1)(8)(7)(9).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Engineering and Graduate Program for Neuroscience, 
Boston University, Boston, USA.
(2)National Institute of Health, Bethesda, USA.
(3)Department of Radiology, MGH, Harvard Medical School, Boston, USA. 
sheraz@nmr.mgh.harvard.edu.
(4)Athinoula A. Martinos Center for Biomedical Imaging, Massachusetts General 
Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 149 
13th Street, CNY-2275, Boston, MA, 02129, USA. sheraz@nmr.mgh.harvard.edu.
(5)McGovern Institute for Brain Research, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 
Cambridge, USA. sheraz@nmr.mgh.harvard.edu.
(6)Department of Radiology, MGH, Harvard Medical School, Boston, USA.
(7)Athinoula A. Martinos Center for Biomedical Imaging, Massachusetts General 
Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 149 
13th Street, CNY-2275, Boston, MA, 02129, USA.
(8)Department of Neurology, MGH, Harvard Medical School, Boston, USA.
(9)Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology, Cambridge, USA.

BACKGROUND: Neurofeedback aids volitional control of one's own brain activity 
using non-invasive recordings of brain activity. The applications of 
neurofeedback include improvement of cognitive performance and treatment of 
various psychiatric and neurological disorders. During real-time 
magnetoencephalography (rt-MEG), sensor-level or source-localized brain activity 
is measured and transformed into a visual feedback cue to the subject. Recent 
real-time fMRI (rt-fMRI) neurofeedback studies have used pattern recognition 
techniques to decode and train a brain state to link brain activities and 
cognitive behaviors. Here, we utilize the real-time decoding technique similar 
to ones employed in rt-fMRI to analyze time-varying rt-MEG signals.
RESULTS: We developed a novel rt-MEG method, state-based neurofeedback (sb-NFB), 
to decode a time-varying brain state, a state signal, from which timings are 
extracted for neurofeedback training. The approach is entirely data-driven: it 
uses sensor-level oscillatory activity to find relevant features that best 
separate the targeted brain states. In a psychophysical task of spatial 
attention switching, we trained five young, healthy subjects using the sb-NFB 
method to decrease the time necessary for switch spatial attention from one 
visual hemifield to the other (referred to as switch time). Training resulted in 
a decrease in switch time with training. We saw that the activity targeted by 
the training involved proportional changes in alpha and beta-band oscillations, 
in sensors at the occipital and parietal regions. We also found that the state 
signal that encodes whether subjects attend to the left or right visual field 
effectively switches consistently with the task.
CONCLUSION: We demonstrated the use of the sb-NFB method when the subject learns 
to increase the speed of shifting covert spatial attention from one visual field 
to the other. The sb-NFB method can target timing features that would otherwise 
also include extraneous features such as visual detection and motor response in 
a simple reaction time task.

DOI: 10.1186/s12938-020-00787-y
PMCID: PMC7291727
PMID: 32532277 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interests.


556. Heliyon. 2020 Nov 23;6(11):e05570. doi: 10.1016/j.heliyon.2020.e05570. 
eCollection 2020 Nov.

Spatial attention modulates earliest visual processing: An electrical 
neuroimaging study.

Zani A(1)(2), Proverbio AM(3)(2).

Author information:
(1)School of Psychology, Vita Salute San Raffaele University, Milan, Italy.
(2)Neuro-Mi Center for Neuroscience, University of Milano-Bicocca, Milan, Italy.
(3)Department of Psychology, University of Milano-Bicocca, Milan, Italy.

Several studies showed that shifting of visuospatial attention modulates sensory 
processing at multiple levels of the visual pathways and beyond, including the 
occipital striate cortices level. However, inconsistent findings have been 
reported thus leaving these issues still disputed. 21 participants took part to 
the present study (the EEG signals of 4 of them were discarded due to 
artifacts). We used ERPs and their neural sources to investigate whether 
shifting spatial attention in space across the horizontal meridian of the visual 
field affected striate cortices activation at the earliest latency. Time-series 
of scalp topographical maps indicated that, unlike ERPs to attentional-neutral 
central cues, ERPs to attention-directing local cues showed earliest polarity 
inversions as a function of stimulated field and processing latency range 
considered, at occipital-parietal electrodes. In between 60-75 ms, attentional 
shifting cues elicited a positivity for both visual fields, whereas at a later 
latency (75-90 ms) they elicited a positivity and a negativity for the upper and 
lower visual hemifields, respectively. Computed neural sources included striate, 
besides extrastriate, cortices for both visual hemifields and latency ranges. 
Conjointly, behavioral responses to targets were faster when they were preceded 
by local than by neutral cues, and when presented in the upper than the lower 
hemifield. Our findings support the hypothesis that attention shifts may affect 
early sensory processing in visual cortices.

© 2020 The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1016/j.heliyon.2020.e05570
PMCID: PMC7695965
PMID: 33294702

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


557. Rev Neurol. 2004 Feb 16-29;38(4):359-65.

[Electrophysiology of executive functions].

[Article in Spanish]

Periáñez JA(1), Barceló F.

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Psicología, Universidad Complutense, Facultad de Psicologia, 
Madrid, España. ja.perianez@uib.es

INTRODUCTION: In neuropsychology, executive functions have been defined as those 
that coordinate the flow of information processing in the brain. In the last 
decade its study has undergone an important development, partly due to the use 
of functional neuroimaging.
DEVELOPMENT: Electrophysiological techniques have also provided a link between 
two specific components of the event related brain potential (ERP) and certain 
control and monitoring processes, as those described in theoretical frameworks 
of executive functioning (i.e., Norman & Shallice). On the one hand, attentional 
set shifting paradigms allow us to relate the anteriorly (P3a; latency 300-350 
ms) and posteriorly (P3b; latency 450-600 ms) distributed components of the so 
called 'novelty P3', with a more general mechanism of attentional set shifting 
that could account for both stimulus and task novelty. On the other hand, 'error 
related negativity' (ERN or En) has shown its sensitivity to action monitoring 
(i.e., error detection and error correction processes), during the execution of 
response selection RT tasks.
CONCLUSIONS: The comprehension of these two executive processes represents 
critical aspects in our understanding of brain function, and has direct 
applications to the design of both theoretical models and assessment and 
rehabilitation programs for patients with dysexecutive disorders.

PMID: 14997461 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


558. J Cogn Neurosci. 2025 Feb 23;37(8):1-20. doi: 10.1162/jocn_a_02312. Online ahead 
of print.

Slower Postencoding Stimulus Reaction Time Predicts Poorer Subsequent Source 
Memory and Increased Midline Cortical Activity.

Largo GV(1)(2), Elshiekh A(1), Rajagopal S(3), Pasvanis S(3), Rajah MN(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.
(2)Toronto Metropolitan University.
(3)Douglas Mental Health University Institute, Verdun, Quebec, Canada.

Individuals vary widely in their ability to encode and retrieve past personal 
experiences in rich contextual detail (episodic memory). However, it remains 
unclear how within-subject variations in attention, measured on a trial-by-trial 
basis at encoding, and between-subject variation in attention and executive 
function abilities affect encoding-related brain activity and subsequent 
episodic retrieval. In the present study, 38 healthy young adults (mean age = 
26.5 ± 4.4, 21 females) completed a task fMRI study in which they were 
instructed to encode colored photographs of everyday objects and their 
left/right spatial location. In addition, participants were asked to respond as 
quickly as possible to a central fixation cross that expanded in size at a 
variable duration after each encoding trial. RTs to the fixation cross preceding 
and following the object were hypothesized to reflect attentional variations 
pre- and postencoding stimulus, respectively. A mixed-effects logistic 
regression was performed to predict source memory success from pre- and 
poststimulus RT. Slower poststimulus RT, but not prestimulus RT, predicted 
poorer subsequent source memory within-subject. In addition, between-subject 
variation in task-switching ability, self-reported cognitive failures, and 
self-reported attentional abilities affected the association between 
poststimulus RT and subsequent memory. In addition, trial-by-trial task fMRI 
analysis indicated that increased encoding activity within default mode network 
regions was associated with slower poststimulus RT and with subsequent source 
retrieval failures. These results shed light onto the cognitive and neural 
factors that contribute to within-subject and between-subject variations in 
source memory ability.

© 2025 Massachusetts Institute of Technology.

DOI: 10.1162/jocn_a_02312
PMCID: PMC12184988
PMID: 39998884


559. Psychiatry Res. 2015 Oct 30;229(3):1017-23. doi: 10.1016/j.psychres.2015.06.018. 
Epub 2015 Jun 27.

Aberrant response inhibition and task switching in psychopathic individuals.

Krakowski MI(1), Foxe J(2), de Sanctis P(3), Nolan K(4), Hoptman MJ(4), Shope 
C(5), Kamiel S(5), Czobor P(6).

Author information:
(1)Nathan Kline Institute for Psychiatric Research, Orangeburg, NY, USA; 
Department of Psychiatry, New York University Langone Medical Center, New York, 
NY, USA. Electronic address: krakow@nki.rfmh.org.
(2)Nathan Kline Institute for Psychiatric Research, Orangeburg, NY, USA; 
Departments of Pediatrics and Neurosciences, Albert Einstein School of Medicine 
& Montefiore Medical Center, Bronx, NY, USA.
(3)Departments of Pediatrics and Neurosciences, Albert Einstein School of 
Medicine & Montefiore Medical Center, Bronx, NY, USA.
(4)Nathan Kline Institute for Psychiatric Research, Orangeburg, NY, USA; 
Department of Psychiatry, New York University Langone Medical Center, New York, 
NY, USA.
(5)Nathan Kline Institute for Psychiatric Research, Orangeburg, NY, USA.
(6)Departments of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, Semmelweis University, Budapest, 
Hungary.

Deficits in cognitive control have been considered a core dysfunction of 
psychopathy, responsible for disrupted self-control. We investigated cognitive 
control impairments, including difficulties with task switching, failure of 
response inhibition, and inability to adjust speed of responding. Participants 
included 16 subjects with psychopathic traits (Ps), and 22 healthy controls 
(HCs). We recorded behavioral responses during a Task Switching paradigm, a 
probe of flexible behavioral adaptation to changing contexts; and a Go/NoGo 
Task, which assesses response inhibition and indexes behavioral impulsivity. 
During task switching, Ps evidenced impairments shifting set when conflicting 
(incongruent) information was presented, but performed as well as HCs in the 
absence of such conflict. In addition, when they encountered these difficulties, 
they failed to adjust their speed of responding. Ps presented also with deficits 
in response inhibition, with many commission errors on the Go/NoGo Task. This 
study identified impairments in response inhibition and in set shifting in 
psychopathic individuals. When shifting set, they evidenced difficulties 
refocusing on a new task when it was incongruent with the previous task. These 
deficits interfere with regulation of ongoing behavior and disrupt 
self-regulation. Our findings suggest abnormal neural processing during 
suppression of inappropriate responses in psychopathic individuals.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.psychres.2015.06.018
PMID: 26257091 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


560. Neuroimage. 2025 Jul 15;315:121248. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2025.121248. Epub 
2025 May 15.

Pumping up your predictive power for cognitive state detection with the proper 
GAINS.

Rodrigues VR(1), Prieto JR(1), Beres SL(1), Stephens C(2), Myers C(3), Napoli 
NJ(4).

Author information:
(1)University of Florida, Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, 
United States of America; University of Florida, Human Informatics and 
Predictive Performance Optimization (HIPPO) Lab, United States of America.
(2)NASA Langley Research Center - Hampton, VA, United States of America.
(3)711th Human Performance Wing, Air Force Research Laboratories - Dayton, OH, 
United States of America.
(4)University of Florida, Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, 
United States of America; University of Florida, Human Informatics and 
Predictive Performance Optimization (HIPPO) Lab, United States of America; 
University of Florida, McKnight Brain Institute (MBI), United States of America. 
Electronic address: n.napoli@ufl.edu.

Detecting cognitive states and impairments through EEG signals is crucial for 
applications in aviation and medicine and has broad applications in the field of 
human-machine interaction. However, existing methods often fail to capture the 
fine-grained neural dynamics of critical brain processes due to limited temporal 
resolution and inadequate signal decomposition techniques. To address this, we 
introduce the Spectral Intensity Stability (SIS) algorithm, a novel technique 
that analyzes the stability and competition of dominant brain frequency 
oscillations across granular timescales (≈4 ms). Unlike traditional spectral 
methods, SIS captures rapid neural transitions and hierarchical frequency 
dynamics, enabling more accurate characterization of task-specific cognitive 
processes. Our study focuses on EEG data from pilots performing multitasking 
simulations under hypoxic and non-hypoxic conditions, a high-stakes scenario 
where cognitive performance is crucial. We divided this multitasking scenario 
into specific cognitive states, such as task precursor, interruption, execution, 
and recovery. Our algorithm SIS achieved a 29.8% improvement in cognitive state 
classification compared to conventional methods, demonstrating superior accuracy 
in distinguishing both task states and hypoxic impairments. This work is novel 
because it bridges gaps left by traditional methods by revealing the role of 
hierarchical spectral dynamics in maintaining cognitive performance. Through the 
Granular Analysis Informing Neural Stability (GAINS) framework, we reveal how 
neuronal groups self-organize across fine-grained time scales, providing new 
understanding of task-switching, neural communication, and criticality. The 
findings highlight the potential for developing real-time cognitive monitoring 
systems to enhance safety and performance in environments where cognitive 
impairments can have serious consequences. Future research should extend these 
insights by incorporating transient behaviors and spatial dynamics to achieve a 
more comprehensive framework for characterizing cognitive states.

Copyright © 2025 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2025.121248
PMID: 40381893 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.


561. Front Hum Neurosci. 2013 Dec 5;7:841. doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2013.00841. eCollection 
2013.

Stimulus-level interference disrupts repetition benefit during task switching in 
middle childhood.

Karayanidis F(1), Jamadar S(2), Sanday D(1).

Author information:
(1)Functional Neuroimaging Lab, School of Psychology, University of Newcastle 
Callaghan, NSW, Australia ; Centre for Translational Neuroscience and Mental 
Health, University of Newcastle and Hunter Medical Research Institute Callaghan, 
NSW, Australia.
(2)Functional Neuroimaging Lab, School of Psychology, University of Newcastle 
Callaghan, NSW, Australia ; Centre for Translational Neuroscience and Mental 
Health, University of Newcastle and Hunter Medical Research Institute Callaghan, 
NSW, Australia ; Monash Biomedical Imaging and School of Psychology and 
Psychiatry, Monash University Melbourne, VIC, Australia.

The task-switching paradigm provides a powerful tool to measure the development 
of core cognitive control processes. In this study, we use the alternating runs 
task-switching paradigm to assess preparatory control processes involved in 
flexibly preparing for a predictable change in task and stimulus-driven control 
processes involved in controlling stimulus-level interference. We present three 
experiments that examine behavioral and event-related potential (ERP) measures 
of task-switching performance in middle childhood and young adulthood under low 
and high stimulus interference conditions. Experiment 1 confirms that our new 
child-friendly tasks produce similar behavioral and electrophysiological 
findings in young adults as those previously reported. Experiment 2 examines 
task switching with univalent stimuli across a range of preparation intervals in 
middle childhood. Experiment 3 compares task switching with bivalent stimuli 
across the same preparation intervals in children and young adults. Children 
produced a larger RT switch cost than adults with univalent stimuli and a short 
preparation interval. Both children and adults showed significant reduction in 
switch cost with increasing preparation interval, but in children this was 
caused by greater increase in RT for repeat than switch trials. Response-locked 
ERPs showed intact preparation for univalent, but less efficient preparation for 
bivalent stimulus conditions. Stimulus-locked ERPs confirmed that children 
showed greater stimulus-level interference for repeat trials, especially with 
bivalent stimuli. We conclude that children show greater stimulus-level 
interference especially for repeat trials under high interference conditions, 
suggesting weaker mental representation of the current task set.

DOI: 10.3389/fnhum.2013.00841
PMCID: PMC3851739
PMID: 24367317


562. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci. 1996 Oct 29;351(1346):1463-70; discussion 
1470-1. doi: 10.1098/rstb.1996.0131.

Dissociating executive functions of the prefrontal cortex.

Robbins TW(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental Psychology, University of Cambridge, U.K.

An analysis is provided of three distinct paradigms that have been used to study 
executive functions of the prefrontal cortex involving planning, self-ordered 
memory or attentional set-shifting. Psychological and anatomical dissociations 
are sought from the perspective of studies of patients with frontal lobe 
lesions, functional neuroimaging, psychometric studies in normal volunteers and 
experimental studies in non-human primates. Particular attention is paid to 
attempts to dissociate mnemonic from other executive capacities. Thus, patients 
with frontal damage are shown to have deficits in their (1) use of strategies to 
improve performance in a spatial working memory task and (2) capacity to make an 
extra-dimensional shift due to a high-order failure of inhibition in an 
attentional set-shifting paradigm. These results are discussed in terms of 
anatomical and neuropharmacological dissociations of different aspects of 
executive function within the prefrontal cortex shown in monkeys.

DOI: 10.1098/rstb.1996.0131
PMID: 8941958 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


563. Front Integr Neurosci. 2018 Aug 7;12:31. doi: 10.3389/fnint.2018.00031. 
eCollection 2018.

Representation of Spatial and Feature Information in the Monkey Dorsal and 
Ventral Prefrontal Cortex.

Constantinidis C(1), Qi XL(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy, Wake Forest School of Medicine, 
Winston-Salem, NC, United States.

The primate prefrontal cortex (PFC) is critical for executive functions 
including working memory, task switching and response selection. The functional 
organization of this area has been a matter of debate over a period of decades. 
Early models proposed segregation of spatial and object information represented 
in working memory in the dorsal and ventral PFC, respectively. Other models 
emphasized the integrative ability of the entire PFC depending on task demands, 
not necessarily tied to working memory. An anterior-posterior hierarchy of 
specialization has also been speculated, in which progressively more abstract 
information is represented more anteriorly. Here we revisit this debate, 
updating these arguments in light of recent evidence in non-human primate 
neurophysiology studies. We show that spatial selectivity is predominantly 
represented in the posterior aspect of the dorsal PFC, regardless of training 
history and task performed. Objects of different features excite both dorsal and 
ventral prefrontal neurons, however neurons highly specialized for feature 
information are located predominantly in the posterior aspect of the ventral 
PFC. In accordance with neuronal selectivity, spatial working memory is 
primarily impaired by inactivation or lesion of the dorsal PFC and object 
working memory by ventral inactivation or lesion. Neuronal responses are plastic 
depending on task training but training too has dissociable effects on ventral 
and dorsal PFC, with the latter appearing to be more plastic. Despite the 
absence of an overall topography, evidence exists for the orderly localization 
of stimulus information at a sub-millimeter scale, within the dimensions of a 
cortical column. Unresolved questions remain, regarding the existence or not of 
a functional map at the areal and columnar scale, and the link between behavior 
and neuronal activity for different prefrontal subdivisions.

DOI: 10.3389/fnint.2018.00031
PMCID: PMC6090048
PMID: 30131679


564. Psychophysiology. 2010 Mar 1;47(2):365-86. doi: 
10.1111/j.1469-8986.2009.00932.x. Epub 2009 Dec 7.

Sequence effects in cued task switching modulate response preparedness and 
repetition priming processes.

Jamadar S(1), Michie PT, Karayanidis F.

Author information:
(1)Functional Neuroimaging Laboratory, School of Psychology, University of 
Newcastle, Callaghan, Australia.

In task-switching paradigms, reaction time (RT) switch cost is eliminated on 
trials after a no-go trial (no-go/go sequence effect). We examined the locus of 
no-go interference on task-switching performance by comparing the event-related 
potential (ERP) time course of go/go and no-go/go sequences from cue onset to 
response execution. We also examined whether noninformative trials (i.e., 
delayed reconfiguration, no response inhibition) produce similar sequence 
effects. Participants switched using informative and noninformative cues 
(Experiment 2) intermixed with no-go trials (Experiment 1). Repeat RT was slower 
for both no-go/informative (pNG/I) and noninformative/informative (pNI/I) than 
informative/informative sequences. ERPs linked to anticipatory preparation 
showed no effect of trial sequence. ERPs indicated that pNG/I sequences reduce 
response readiness whereas pNI/I sequences reduce repetition benefit for repeat 
trials. Implications for task-switching models are discussed.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1469-8986.2009.00932.x
PMID: 20003149 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


565. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 Oct 20;106(42):17974-9. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.0903593106. Epub 2009 Oct 5.

Decoding cognitive control in human parietal cortex.

Esterman M(1), Chiu YC, Tamber-Rosenau BJ, Yantis S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, Johns Hopkins University, 
3400 North Charles Street, Baltimore, MD 21218-2686, USA. esterman@jhu.edu

Efficient execution of perceptual-motor tasks requires rapid voluntary 
reconfiguration of cognitive task sets as circumstances unfold. Such acts of 
cognitive control, which are thought to rely on a network of cortical regions in 
prefrontal and posterior parietal cortex, include voluntary shifts of attention 
among perceptual inputs or among memory representations, or switches between 
categorization or stimulus-response mapping rules. A critical unanswered 
question is whether task set shifts in these different domains are controlled by 
a common, domain-independent mechanism or by separate, domain-specific 
mechanisms. Recent studies have implicated a common region of medial superior 
parietal lobule (mSPL) as a domain-independent source of cognitive control 
during shifts between perceptual, mnemonic, and rule representations. Here, we 
use fMRI and event-related multivoxel pattern classification to show that 
spatial patterns of brain activity within mSPL reliably express which of several 
domains of cognitive control is at play on a moment-by-moment basis. Critically, 
these spatiotemporal brain patterns are stable over time within subjects tested 
several months apart and across a variety of tasks, including shifting 
visuospatial attention, switching categorization rules, and shifting attention 
in working memory.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0903593106
PMCID: PMC2764943
PMID: 19805050 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


566. Nat Commun. 2022 Aug 10;13(1):4702. doi: 10.1038/s41467-022-32382-1.

Neuronal congruency effects in macaque prefrontal cortex.

Yao T(1)(2), Vanduffel W(3)(4)(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosciences, Laboratory of Neuro- and Psychophysiology, KU 
Leuven Medical School, Leuven, Belgium. taoyao12@hotmail.com.
(2)Leuven Brain Institute, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium. taoyao12@hotmail.com.
(3)Department of Neurosciences, Laboratory of Neuro- and Psychophysiology, KU 
Leuven Medical School, Leuven, Belgium. WVanduffel@mgh.harvard.edu.
(4)Leuven Brain Institute, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium. 
WVanduffel@mgh.harvard.edu.
(5)Athinoula A. Martinos Center for Biomedical Imaging, Massachusetts General 
Hospital, Charlestown, MA, USA. WVanduffel@mgh.harvard.edu.
(6)Department of Radiology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA. 
WVanduffel@mgh.harvard.edu.

The interplay between task-relevant and task-irrelevant information may induce 
conflicts that impair behavioral performance, a.k.a. behavioral congruency 
effects. The neuronal mechanisms underlying behavioral congruency effects, 
however, are poorly understood. We recorded single unit activity in monkey 
prefrontal cortex using a task-switching paradigm and discovered a neuronal 
congruency effect (NCE) that is carried by target and distractor neurons which 
process target and distractor-related information, respectively. The former 
neurons provide more signal, the latter less noise in congruent compared to 
incongruent conditions, resulting in a better target representation. Such NCE is 
dominated by the level of congruency, and is not determined by the task rules 
the subjects used, their reaction times (RT), the length of the delay period, 
nor the response levels of the neurons. We propose that this NCE can explain 
behavioral congruency effects in general, as well as previous fMRI and EEG 
results in various conflict paradigms.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41467-022-32382-1
PMCID: PMC9365805
PMID: 35948534 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.


567. Neuroimage Clin. 2013 Aug 2;3:106-14. doi: 10.1016/j.nicl.2013.07.007. 
eCollection 2013.

White matter microstructure correlates with autism trait severity in a combined 
clinical-control sample of high-functioning adults.

Gibbard CR(1), Ren J, Seunarine KK, Clayden JD, Skuse DH, Clark CA.

Author information:
(1)Imaging and Biophysics Unit, UCL Institute of Child Health, 30 Guilford 
Street, London WC1N 1EH, UK.

Diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) studies have demonstrated white matter (WM) 
abnormalities in tracts involved in emotion processing in autism spectrum 
disorder (ASD), but little is known regarding the nature and distribution of WM 
anomalies in relation to ASD trait severity in adults. Increasing evidence 
suggests that ASD occurs at the extreme of a distribution of social abilities. 
We aimed to examine WM microstructure as a potential marker for ASD symptom 
severity in a combined clinical-neurotypical population. SIENAX was used to 
estimate whole brain volume. Tract-based spatial statistics (TBSS) was used to 
provide a voxel-wise comparison of WM microstructure in 50 high-functioning 
young adults: 25 ASD and 25 neurotypical. The severity of ASD traits was 
measured by autism quotient (AQ); we examined regressions between DTI markers of 
WM microstructure and ASD trait severity. Cognitive abilities, measured by 
intelligence quotient, were well-matched between the groups and were controlled 
in all analyses. There were no significant group differences in whole brain 
volume. TBSS showed widespread regions of significantly reduced fractional 
anisotropy (FA) and increased mean diffusivity (MD) and radial diffusivity (RD) 
in ASD compared with controls. Linear regression analyses in the combined sample 
showed that average whole WM skeleton FA was negatively influenced by AQ 
(p = 0.004), whilst MD and RD were positively related to AQ (p = 0.002; 
p = 0.001). Regression slopes were similar within both groups and strongest for 
AQ social, communication and attention switching scores. In conclusion, similar 
regression characteristics were found between WM microstructure and ASD trait 
severity in a combined sample of ASD and neurotypical adults. WM anomalies were 
relatively more severe in the clinically diagnosed sample. Both findings suggest 
that there is a dimensional relationship between WM microstructure and severity 
of ASD traits from neurotypical subjects through to clinical ASD, with reduced 
coherence of WM associated with greater ASD symptoms. General cognitive 
abilities were independent of the relationship between WM indices and ASD 
traits.

DOI: 10.1016/j.nicl.2013.07.007
PMCID: PMC3791280
PMID: 24179854


568. Biol Psychiatry. 1998 Mar 1;43(5):348-57. doi: 10.1016/s0006-3223(97)00201-1.

Cognitive deficits in obsessive-compulsive disorder on tests of frontal-striatal 
function.

Purcell R(1), Maruff P, Kyrios M, Pantelis C.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Melbourne, Australia.

BACKGROUND: Although neuropsychological and neuroimaging studies of 
obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) have implicated the frontal cortex and 
subcortical structures in the pathophysiology of the disorder, few studies have 
examined cognitive function in patients with OCD on tasks validated in the 
assessment of frontal lobe and subcortical dysfunction.
METHODS: The accuracy and latency of executive and visual memory function was 
assessed in 23 nondepressed OCD patients and 23 normal healthy controls matched 
for age, sex, education, and estimated IQ.
RESULTS: The patients with OCD performed within the normal range on tasks of 
short-term memory capacity, delay dependent visual memory, pattern recognition, 
attentional shifting, and planning ability; however, specific cognitive deficits 
related to spatial working memory, spatial recognition, and motor initiation and 
execution were observed in the patient group. These deficits were not correlated 
with aspects of the patients' intellectual functioning or comorbid psychological 
symptoms, suggesting that the impairments were related to the specific clinical 
features of OCD.
CONCLUSIONS: Patients with OCD showed specific cognitive deficits on tasks of 
executive and visual memory function. The pattern of impaired performance in 
these patients was qualitatively similar to the performance of patients with 
frontal lobe excisions and subcortical pathology on the same test battery, 
suggesting that the underlying pathophysiology of the disorder could best be 
conceptualized as reflecting dysfunction of frontal-striatal systems.

DOI: 10.1016/s0006-3223(97)00201-1
PMID: 9513750 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


569. Biol Psychiatry. 2004 Jan 1;55(1):32-9. doi: 10.1016/s0006-3223(03)00701-7.

Neuropsychological performance in pediatric bipolar disorder.

Dickstein DP(1), Treland JE, Snow J, McClure EB, Mehta MS, Towbin KE, Pine DS, 
Leibenluft E.

Author information:
(1)National Institute of Mental Health Mood and Anxiety Disorders Program, 
National Institutes of Health, Department of Health and Human Services, 
Bethesda, Maryland 20892-1255, USA.

BACKGROUND: Growing awareness of childhood bipolar disorder necessitates further 
cognitive neuroscience research to determine unique developmental differences 
between pediatric and adult onset bipolar disorder. We sought to examine whether 
neuropsychological function in children with bipolar disorder resembles that in 
adults with the illness and to extend our knowledge about cognitive function in 
pediatric bipolar disorder.
METHODS: We administered a computerized neuropsychological test battery known as 
the Cambridge Neuropsychological Test Automated Battery to a sample of 21 
children and adolescents with bipolar disorder and compared them with 21 age- 
and gender-matched controls.
RESULTS: In comparison to controls, children with bipolar disorder were impaired 
on measures of attentional set-shifting and visuospatial memory. Post hoc 
analyses in pediatric bipolar disorder subjects did not show significant 
associations between neuropsychological performance and manic symptomatology or 
attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder comorbidity.
CONCLUSIONS: Cambridge Neuropsychological Test Automated Battery data presented 
here in pediatric bipolar disorder fit well within the broader framework of 
known neurocognitive deficits in adult bipolar disorder. Our pediatric bipolar 
disorder subjects demonstrated selective deficiencies in attentional 
set-shifting and visuospatial memory. Our work suggests altered ventrolateral 
prefrontal cortex function, especially when linked to other lesion and 
neuroimaging studies.

DOI: 10.1016/s0006-3223(03)00701-7
PMID: 14706422 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


570. Psychophysiology. 2020 May;57(5):e13533. doi: 10.1111/psyp.13533. Epub 2020 Jan 
29.

Task-switching costs have distinct phase-locked and nonphase-locked EEG power 
effects.

McKewen M(1)(2), Cooper PS(1)(2)(3)(4), Wong ASW(1)(3), Michie PT(1)(2), Sauseng 
P(5), Karayanidis F(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Functional Neuroimaging Laboratory, School of Psychology, University of 
Newcastle, Callaghan, NSW, Australia.
(2)Priority Research Centre for Brain and Mental Health, University of 
Newcastle, Callaghan, NSW, Australia.
(3)Priority Research Centre for Stroke and Brain Injury, University of 
Newcastle, Callaghan, NSW, Australia.
(4)School of Psychological Sciences, Turner Institute for Brain and Mental 
Health, Monash University, Melbourne, VIC, Australia.
(5)Department of Psychology, Ludwig-Maximilians-University Munich, Munich, 
Germany.

Event-related potentials (ERPs) and total time-frequency power analyses have 
shown that performance costs during task switching are related to differential 
preparation to switch tasks (switch cost) and repeat the same task (mixing cost) 
during both proactive control (cue-to-target interval; CTI) and reactive control 
(post-target). The time-frequency EEG signal is comprised of both phase-locked 
activity (associated with stimulus-specific processes) and nonphase-locked 
activity (represents processes thought to persist over longer timeframes and do 
not contribute to the average ERP). In the present study, we used a cued 
task-switching paradigm to examine whether phase-locked and nonphase-locked 
power are differentially modulated by switch and mixing effects in intervals 
associated with the need for proactive control (CTI) and reactive control 
(post-target interval). Phase-locked activity was observed in the theta and 
alpha bands, closely resembled that seen for total power, and was consistent 
with switch and mixing ERP positivities. Nonphase-locked analyses showed theta 
and alpha power effects for both switch and mixing effects early in the CTI and 
as well as more sustained alpha and beta activity around cue onset, and 
extending from mid-CTI into the post-target interval. Nonphase-locked activity 
in pretarget alpha and posttarget theta power were both correlated with response 
time mixing cost. These findings provide novel insight into phase-locked and 
nonphase-locked activity associated with switch and mixing costs that are not 
evident with ERP or total time-frequency analyses.

© 2020 Society for Psychophysiological Research.

DOI: 10.1111/psyp.13533
PMID: 31994736 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


571. Rev Neurol. 2000 May 1-15;30(9):855-64.

[A critical review of the specificity of the Wisconsin card sorting test for the 
assessment of prefrontal function].

[Article in Spanish]

Barceló F(1), Santomé-Calleja A.

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Psicobiología, Universidad Complutense de Somosaguas, Madrid, 
España. fbarcelo@psi.ucm.es

INTRODUCTION AND OBJECTIVE: Clinical and experimental research with the 
Wisconsin Card Sorting Test (WCST) has shown inconsistencies which bring into 
question the specificity of the test as a marker of frontal dysfunction. The aim 
of the present review is to evaluate the causes and the consequences of those 
criticisms for the assessment of both prefrontal function and the executive 
system of attention.
DEVELOPMENT: Clinical evidence confirms that, in its present form, the WCST can 
not discriminate between lesions in frontal and non frontal brain regions. 
Moreover, functional neuroimaging studies have shown rapid and widespread 
activation of frontal and non frontal brain regions during WCST performance. On 
the one hand, these studies strongly suggest that the concept of anatomically 
'pure' tasks is deceptive, but they also provide us with evidence that 
inconsistencies in WCST research might be motivated by problems with the 
internal validity and reliability of the original test as a measure of 
attentional set shifting ability. In contrast, recent studies have successfully 
employed WCST analogues to link precise cognitive processes with anatomically 
and functionally well defined prefrontal areas.
CONCLUSIONS: It is deemed necessary to apply the new technical and 
methodological developments to generate more valid and reliable 
neuropsychological tests, that yield a better correspondence between anatomy and 
function. This will make possible future progress in the clinical assessment of 
higher brain functions.

PMID: 10870201 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


572. Neuroimage. 2022 Feb 15;247:118853. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2021.118853. Epub 
2021 Dec 23.

Neural markers of proactive and reactive cognitive control are altered during 
walking: A Mobile Brain-Body Imaging (MoBI) study.

Richardson DP(1), Foxe JJ(1), Mazurek KA(1), Abraham N(1), Freedman EG(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroscience, The Frederick A. and Marion J. Schindler 
Cognitive Neurophysiology Laboratory, The Del Monte Institute for Neuroscience, 
University of Rochester School of Medicine and Dentistry, Rochester, NY, USA.
(2)Department of Neuroscience, The Frederick A. and Marion J. Schindler 
Cognitive Neurophysiology Laboratory, The Del Monte Institute for Neuroscience, 
University of Rochester School of Medicine and Dentistry, Rochester, NY, USA. 
Electronic address: ed_freedman@urmc.rochester.edu.

The processing of sensory information and the generation of motor commands 
needed to produce coordinated actions can interfere with ongoing cognitive 
tasks. Even simple motor behaviors like walking can alter cognitive task 
performance. This cognitive-motor interference (CMI) could arise from disruption 
of planning in anticipation of carrying out the task (proactive control) and/or 
from disruption of the execution of the task (reactive control). In young 
healthy adults, walking-induced interference with behavioral performance may not 
be readily observable because flexibility in neural circuits can compensate for 
the added demands of simultaneous loads. In this study, cognitive-motor loads 
were systematically increased during cued task-switching while underlying 
neurophysiologic changes in proactive and reactive mechanisms were measured. 
Brain activity was recorded from 22 healthy young adults using 64-channel 
electroencephalography (EEG) based Mobile Brain/Body Imaging (MoBI) as they 
alternately sat or walked during performance of cued task-switching. Walking 
altered neurophysiological indices of both proactive and reactive control. 
Walking amplified cue-evoked late fontal slow waves, and reduced the amplitude 
of target-evoked fronto-central N2 and parietal P3. The effects of walking on 
evoked neural responses systematically increased as the task became increasingly 
difficult. This may provide an objective brain marker of increasing cognitive 
load, and may prove to be useful in identifying seemingly healthy individuals 
who are currently able to disguise ongoing degenerative processes through active 
compensation. If, however, degeneration continues unabated these people may 
reach a compensatory limit at which point both cognitive performance and control 
of coordinated actions may decline rapidly.

Copyright © 2021. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2021.118853
PMCID: PMC8822329
PMID: 34954331 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare no competing interests.


573. Nat Hum Behav. 2023 Dec;7(12):2199-2211. doi: 10.1038/s41562-023-01725-3. Epub 
2023 Oct 26.

Stunting in infancy is associated with atypical activation of working memory and 
attention networks.

Wijeakumar S(1), Forbes SH(2), Magnotta VA(3), Deoni S(4)(5), Jackson K(6), 
Singh VP(7), Tiwari M(7), Kumar A(7), Spencer JP(8).

Author information:
(1)School of Psychology, University of Nottingham, Nottingham, UK. 
sobanawartiny.wijeakumar@nottingham.ac.uk.
(2)Department of Psychology, Durham University, Durham, UK.
(3)Department of Radiology, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, USA.
(4)Maternal, Newborn and Child Health Discovery & Tools, Bill & Melinda Gates 
Foundation, Seattle, WA, USA.
(5)Advanced Baby Imaging Lab, New England Pediatric Institute of 
Neurodevelopment, Rhode Island Hospital, Providence, RI, USA.
(6)School of Psychology, University of East Anglia, Norwich, UK.
(7)Community Empowerment Lab, Lucknow, India.
(8)School of Psychology, University of East Anglia, Norwich, UK. 
j.spencer@uea.ac.uk.

Stunting is associated with poor long-term cognitive, academic and economic 
outcomes, yet the mechanisms through which stunting impacts cognition in early 
development remain unknown. In a first-ever neuroimaging study conducted on 
infants from rural India, we demonstrate that stunting impacts a critical, 
early-developing cognitive system-visual working memory. Stunted infants showed 
poor visual working memory performance and were easily distractible. Poor 
performance was associated with reduced engagement of the left anterior 
intraparietal sulcus, a region involved in visual working memory maintenance and 
greater suppression in the right temporoparietal junction, a region involved in 
attentional shifting. When assessed one year later, stunted infants had lower 
problem-solving scores, while infants of normal height with greater left 
anterior intraparietal sulcus activation showed higher problem-solving scores. 
Finally, short-for-age infants with poor physical growth indices but good visual 
working memory performance showed more positive outcomes suggesting that 
intervention efforts should focus on improving working memory and reducing 
distractibility in infancy.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41562-023-01725-3
PMCID: PMC10730391
PMID: 37884677 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: S.D. declares the following: Wyeth Nutrition 
(speaker honorarium); Nestle Nutrition (consultant and research funding); and 
Mead Johnson Nutrition (speaker honorarium). The remaining authors declare no 
competing interests.


574. Neuroimage. 2019 Feb 1;186:70-82. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2018.10.068. Epub 
2018 Oct 28.

Dynamic low frequency EEG phase synchronization patterns during proactive 
control of task switching.

López ME(1), Pusil S(2), Pereda E(3), Maestú F(4), Barceló F(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental Psychology, Psychological Processes and Speech 
Therapy, Universidad Complutense of Madrid, Spain; Laboratory of Cognitive and 
Computational Neuroscience (UCM-UPM), Centre for Biomedical Technology (CTB), 
Madrid, Spain; Networking Research Center on Bioengineering, Biomaterials and 
Nanomedicine (CIBER-BBN), Madrid, Spain. Electronic address: 
meugenia.lopez@ctb.upm.es.
(2)Laboratory of Cognitive and Computational Neuroscience (UCM-UPM), Centre for 
Biomedical Technology (CTB), Madrid, Spain; Laboratory of Neuropsychology, 
University of the Balearic Islands, Spain.
(3)Laboratory of Cognitive and Computational Neuroscience (UCM-UPM), Centre for 
Biomedical Technology (CTB), Madrid, Spain; Electrical Engineering and 
Bioengineering Group, Department of Industrial Engineering & IUNE, Universidad 
de La Laguna, Tenerife, Spain.
(4)Department of Experimental Psychology, Psychological Processes and Speech 
Therapy, Universidad Complutense of Madrid, Spain; Laboratory of Cognitive and 
Computational Neuroscience (UCM-UPM), Centre for Biomedical Technology (CTB), 
Madrid, Spain; Networking Research Center on Bioengineering, Biomaterials and 
Nanomedicine (CIBER-BBN), Madrid, Spain.
(5)Laboratory of Neuropsychology, University of the Balearic Islands, Spain. 
Electronic address: f.barcelo@uib.es.

Cognitive flexibility is critical for humans living in complex societies with 
ever-growing multitasking demands. Yet the low-frequency neural dynamics of 
distinct task-specific and domain-general mechanisms sub-serving mental 
flexibility are still ill-defined. Here we estimated phase electroencephalogram 
synchronization by using inter-trial phase coherence (ITPC) at the source space 
while twenty six young participants were intermittently cued to switch or repeat 
their perceptual categorization rule of Gabor gratings varying in color and 
thickness (switch task). Therefore, the aim of this study was to examine whether 
a proactive control is associated with connectivity only in the frontoparietal 
theta network, or also involves distinct neural connectivity within the delta 
band, as distinct neural signatures while preparing to switch or repeat a task 
set, respectively. To this end, we focused the analysis on late-latencies (from 
500 to 800 msec post-cue onset), since they are known to be associated with 
top-down cognitive control processes. We confirmed that proactive control during 
a task switch was associated with frontoparietal theta connectivity. But 
importantly, we also found a distinct role of delta band oscillatory 
synchronization in proactive control, engaging more posterior frontotemporal 
regions as opposed to frontoparietal theta connectivity. Additionally, we built 
a regression model by using the ITPC results in delta and theta bands as 
predictors, and the behavioral accuracy in the switch task as the criterion, 
obtaining significant results for both frequency bands. All these findings 
support the existence of distinct proactive cognitive control processes related 
to functionally distinct though highly complementary theta and delta 
frontoparietal and temporoparietal oscillatory networks at late-latency temporal 
scales.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2018.10.068
PMID: 30394328 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


575. Neuroimage Clin. 2021;30:102617. doi: 10.1016/j.nicl.2021.102617. Epub 2021 Mar 
19.

Resting-state brain oscillations predict cognitive function in psychiatric 
disorders: A transdiagnostic machine learning approach.

Sargent K(1), Chavez-Baldini U(2), Master SL(3), Verweij KJH(2), Lok A(2), 
Sutterland AL(2), Vulink NC(2), Denys D(2), Smit DJA(2), Nieman DH(2).

Author information:
(1)Amsterdam University Medical Centers (location AMC), University of Amsterdam, 
Department of Psychiatry, Meibergdreef 9, Amsterdam, Netherlands. Electronic 
address: k.s.sargent@amsterdamumc.nl.
(2)Amsterdam University Medical Centers (location AMC), University of Amsterdam, 
Department of Psychiatry, Meibergdreef 9, Amsterdam, Netherlands.
(3)Max Planck Institute for Biological Cybernetics, Max Planck-Ring 8, 72076 
Tuebingen, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Cognitive dysfunction is widespread in psychiatric disorders and can 
significantly impact quality of life. Deficits cut across traditional diagnostic 
boundaries, necessitating new approaches to understand how cognitive function 
relates to large-scale brain activity and psychiatric symptoms across the 
diagnostic spectrum.
OBJECTIVE: Using random forest regression, we aimed to identify transdiagnostic 
patterns linking cognitive function to resting-state EEG oscillations.
METHODS: 216 participants recruited through an outpatient psychiatric clinic 
completed the Cambridge Neuropsychological Test Automated Battery and underwent 
a 5-minute eyes-closed resting state EEG recording. We built random forest 
regression models to predict performance on each cognitive test using the 
resting-state EEG power spectrum as input, and we compared model performance to 
a sampling distribution constructed with random permutations. For models that 
performed significantly better than chance, we used feature importance estimates 
to identify features of the EEG power spectrum that are predictive of cognitive 
functioning.
RESULTS: Random forest models successfully predicted performance on measures of 
episodic memory and associative learning (Paired Associates Learning, PAL), 
information processing speed (Choice Reaction Time, CRT), and attentional 
set-shifting and executive function (Intra-Extra Dimensional Set Shift, IED). 
Oscillatory power in the upper alpha range was associated with better 
performance on PAL and CRT, while low alpha power was associated with worse CRT 
performance. Beta power predicted poor performance on all three tests. Theta 
power was associated with good performance on PAL, and delta and theta 
oscillations were identified as predictors of good performance on IED. No 
differences in cognitive performance were found between diagnostic categories.
CONCLUSION: Resting oscillations are predictive of certain dimensions of 
cognitive function across various psychiatric disorders. These findings may 
inform treatment development to improve cognition.

Copyright © 2021 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.nicl.2021.102617
PMCID: PMC7985402
PMID: 33752077 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


576. J Nucl Med. 2025 Mar 3;66(3):405-409. doi: 10.2967/jnumed.124.268317.

Dopaminergic Mechanisms of Cognitive Flexibility: An [(18)F]Fallypride PET 
Study.

Miederer I(1), Buchholz HG(2), Rademacher L(3)(4), Eckart C(3), Kraft D(3)(5), 
Piel M(6), Fiebach CJ(3)(7), Schreckenberger M(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Nuclear Medicine, University Medical Center of the Johannes 
Gutenberg University Mainz, Mainz, Germany; 
isabelle.miederer@unimedizin-mainz.de.
(2)Department of Nuclear Medicine, University Medical Center of the Johannes 
Gutenberg University Mainz, Mainz, Germany.
(3)Department of Psychology, Goethe University Frankfurt, Frankfurt am Main, 
Germany.
(4)Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, University of Lübeck, Lübeck, 
Germany.
(5)Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, Tübingen Center for Mental 
Health, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany.
(6)Department of Nuclear Chemistry, Johannes Gutenberg University Mainz, Mainz, 
Germany; and.
(7)Brain Imaging Center, Goethe University Frankfurt, Frankfurt am Main, 
Germany.

Cognitive flexibility is the ability to appropriately adapt one's thinking and 
behavior to changing environmental demands and is conceptualized as an aspect of 
executive function. The dopamine system has been implicated in cognitive 
flexibility; however, a direct, that is, neurochemical, link to cognitive 
flexibility has not been shown yet. The aim of this study was, therefore, to 
investigate how cognitive flexibility is mediated by dopaminergic signaling in 
the ventromedial prefrontal cortex (vmPFC). Methods: Eighteen participants were 
measured in a PET study with 174 ± 12 MBq of the D2/3 receptor ligand 
[18F]fallypride in a block design with 2 parts. While participants processed 2 
tasks sequentially without rule switching on a computer screen in the first part 
of the PET scan, they had to flexibly switch between the 2 task rules after 100 
min after injection in the second part. Dopamine release (γ) was quantified 
using the linearized simplified reference region model contrasting the 2 task 
blocks (switching vs. no-switching/baseline). Results: The statistical analysis 
of the parametric γ-images showed that the increased cognitive demand during 
task switching induced a displacement of the D2/3 receptor ligand 
[18F]fallypride in the vmPFC (maximum T value = 13.8; cluster size: 528 voxels; 
familywise error rate-corrected P < 0.001; mean γ = 0.022 ± 0.006 min-1). 
Furthermore, a correlation between behavioral switch costs and vmPFC 
[18F]fallypride displacement suggested that participants showing greater 
dopamine release were more efficient in task switching. Conclusion: To our 
knowledge, this is the first experimental PET study to show direct involvement 
of dopamine in the vmPFC in a task-switching paradigm, confirming model 
assumptions about the neurochemical basis of cognitive flexibility.

© 2025 by the Society of Nuclear Medicine and Molecular Imaging.

DOI: 10.2967/jnumed.124.268317
PMID: 39884770 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


577. Hum Brain Mapp. 2005 May;25(1):35-45. doi: 10.1002/hbm.20128.

Meta-analysis of neuroimaging studies of the Wisconsin card-sorting task and 
component processes.

Buchsbaum BR(1), Greer S, Chang WL, Berman KF.

Author information:
(1)Unit on Integrative Neuroimaging, Clinical Brain Disorders Branch, National 
Institute of Mental Health, National Institutes of Health, Department of Health 
and Human Services, Bethesda, Maryland 20892-1365, USA. 
buchsbab@intra.nimh.nih.gov

A quantitative meta-analysis using the activation likelihood estimation (ALE) 
method was used to investigate the brain basis of the Wisconsin Card-Sorting 
Task (WCST) and two hypothesized component processes, task switching and 
response suppression. All three meta-analyses revealed distributed 
frontoparietal activation patterns consistent with the status of the WCST as an 
attention-demanding executive task. The WCST was associated with extensive 
bilateral clusters of reliable cross-study activity in the lateral prefrontal 
cortex, anterior cingulate cortex, and inferior parietal lobule. Task switching 
revealed a similar, although less robust, frontoparietal pattern with additional 
clusters of activity in the opercular region of the ventral prefrontal cortex, 
bilaterally. Response-suppression tasks, represented by studies of the go/no-go 
paradigm, showed a large and highly right-lateralized region of activity in the 
right prefrontal cortex. The activation patterns are interpreted as reflecting a 
neural fractionation of the cognitive components that must be integrated during 
the performance of the WCST.

DOI: 10.1002/hbm.20128
PMCID: PMC6871753
PMID: 15846821 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


578. Psychiatry Res. 2019 Sep;279:55-61. doi: 10.1016/j.psychres.2019.07.007. Epub 
2019 Jul 4.

Cognitive profiles in major depressive disorder: Comparing remitters and 
non-remitters to rTMS treatment.

Abo Aoun M(1), Meek BP(1), Modirrousta M(2).

Author information:
(1)St Boniface General Hospital, Winnipeg, MB, R2H2A6, Canada.
(2)St Boniface General Hospital, Winnipeg, MB, R2H2A6, Canada; University of 
Manitoba, Department of Psychiatry, Winnipeg, MB, Canada. Electronic address: 
mmodirrousta@sbgh.mb.ca.

Major Depressive Disorder (MDD) is typically accompanied by cognitive 
impairment. Repetitive Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation (rTMS) treatment for 
MDD involves stimulation of the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex which plays an 
important role in cognition. This study aimed to identify differences in 
cognitive profiles between remitters and non-remitters to rTMS at baseline and 
across treatment. 25 patients with MDD performed cognitive tasks at baseline and 
after 6, 12 and 30 sessions of rTMS. At baseline, there was no difference in 
simple reaction time (RT) between groups, but remitters (n = 13) showed faster 
RTs than non-remitters (n = 12) in the Switch and No-Switch conditions of Task 
Switching. Across sessions, remitters showed a decrease in 3-Back omission 
errors and RTs to 3-Back, Stroop's Congruent and Incongruent, and Task 
Switching's Switch and No-Switch conditions, whereas non-remitters only showed 
improvements in Stroop Congruent and Incongruent RTs. Baseline and final scores 
on the Hamilton Depression Rating Scale were positively correlated with Switch 
and No-Switch RTs. This study demonstrates that eventual remitters to rTMS 
treatment for MDD perform better in cognitive tasks requiring shifting 
attention, and this difference is observable prior to the start of treatment. 
Remitters also show improvement in both their mood and cognitive performance.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.psychres.2019.07.007
PMID: 31302352 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


579. Sleep. 2018 Feb 1;41(2):zsx200. doi: 10.1093/sleep/zsx200.

Sleep Deprivation Triggers Cognitive Control Impairments in Task-Goal Switching.

Slama H(1)(2)(3), Chylinski DO(1)(3), Deliens G(1)(4)(3), Leproult R(1)(3), 
Schmitz R(1)(3), Peigneux P(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)UR2NF - Neuropsychology and Functional Neuroimaging Research Group at CRCN - 
Center for Research in Cognition and Neurosciences and UNI - ULB Neurosciences 
Institute, Université Libre de Bruxelles (ULB), Brussels, Belgium.
(2)UNESCOG - Research Unit in Cognitive Neurosciences at CRCN - Center for 
Research in Cognition and Neurosciences and UNI - ULB Neurosciences Institute, 
Université Libre de Bruxelles (ULB), Brussels, Belgium.
(3)Work Performed: Université Libre de Bruxelles (ULB).
(4)ACTE - Autism in Context: Theory and Experience/Langage & Esprit, Université 
libre de Bruxelles (ULB), Brussels, Belgium.

STUDY OBJECTIVES: This study investigates the impact of sleep deprivation (SD) 
on task-goal switching, a key component of cognitive flexibility.
METHODS: Task-goal switching performance was tested after one night of regular 
sleep (n = 17 participants) or of total SD (n = 18). To understand the 
relationships between task-switching performance and other cognitive processes 
following SD, participants were tested for other key attentional (alertness and 
vigilance) and executive (inhibition and working memory) functions. Spontaneous 
eye blink rate (EBR) was also measured as an indirect marker of striatal 
dopaminergic function.
RESULTS: SD negatively affects task-goal switching as well as attentional and 
inhibition measures, but not working memory. Changes in task-goal switching 
performance were not significantly correlated with changes in objective and 
subjective markers of fatigue and sleepiness, response inhibition, or 
spontaneous EBR.
CONCLUSIONS: Altogether, our results show differentiated effects of SD on key 
executive functions such as working memory, inhibition, and task-goal switching.

© Sleep Research Society 2017. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of 
the Sleep Research Society. All rights reserved. For permissions, please e-mail 
journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/sleep/zsx200
PMID: 29244170


580. Cortex. 2016 Sep;82:24-34. doi: 10.1016/j.cortex.2016.05.005. Epub 2016 May 24.

Learning to be inflexible: Enhanced attentional biases in Parkinson's disease.

Fallon SJ(1), Hampshire A(2), Barker RA(3), Owen AM(4).

Author information:
(1)Medical Research Council Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit, Cambridge, UK; 
Department of Experimental Psychology, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK. 
Electronic address: sean.fallon@psy.ox.ac.uk.
(2)Computational Cognitive & Clinical Neuroimaging Laboratory, Imperial College 
London, UK.
(3)John van Geest Centre for Brain Repair, Department of Clinical Neurosciences, 
University of Cambridge, UK.
(4)Medical Research Council Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit, Cambridge, UK; 
The Brain and Mind Institute, University of Western Ontario, CA, USA.

Impaired attentional flexibility is considered to be one of the core cognitive 
deficits in Parkinson's disease (PD). However, the mechanisms that underlie this 
impairment are contested. Progress in resolving this dispute has also been 
hindered by the fact that cognitive deficits in PD are heterogeneous; therefore, 
it is unclear whether attentional impairments are only present in a subgroup of 
patients. Here, we demonstrate that what differentiates PD patients from 
age-matched controls is an inability to shift attention away from previously 
relevant information (perseveration) and an inability to shift attention towards 
previously irrelevant information (learned irrelevance). In contrast, there was 
no evidence that PD patients, compared to controls, were impaired in being able 
to appropriately attend to, or ignore, novel information. Furthermore, when 
patients were stratified according to their level of executive impairment, the 
executively impaired group showed a selective deficit in set formation compared 
to the unimpaired group, a behavioural pattern reminiscent of cortical dopamine 
depletion. Cumulatively, these results suggest that cognitive inflexibility in 
PD relates to a specific form of attentional dysfunction, in which learned 
attentional biases cannot be overcome.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cortex.2016.05.005
PMID: 27318659 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


581. PLoS One. 2015 Jun 24;10(6):e0131556. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0131556. 
eCollection 2015.

Task uncertainty can account for mixing and switch costs in task-switching.

Cooper PS(1), Garrett PM(2), Rennie JL(1), Karayanidis F(1).

Author information:
(1)Functional Neuroimaging Laboratory, School of Psychology, University of 
Newcastle, Callaghan, Australia; Priority Research Centre for Translational 
Neuroscience and Mental Health, University of Newcastle, Callaghan, Australia.
(2)Functional Neuroimaging Laboratory, School of Psychology, University of 
Newcastle, Callaghan, Australia.

Cognitive control is required in situations that involve uncertainty or change, 
such as when resolving conflict, selecting responses and switching tasks. 
Recently, it has been suggested that cognitive control can be conceptualised as 
a mechanism which prioritises goal-relevant information to deal with 
uncertainty. This hypothesis has been supported using a paradigm that requires 
conflict resolution. In this study, we examine whether cognitive control during 
task switching is also consistent with this notion. We used information theory 
to quantify the level of uncertainty in different trial types during a cued 
task-switching paradigm. We test the hypothesis that differences in uncertainty 
between task repeat and task switch trials can account for typical behavioural 
effects in task-switching. Increasing uncertainty was associated with less 
efficient performance (i.e., slower and less accurate), particularly on switch 
trials and trials that afford little opportunity for advance preparation. 
Interestingly, both mixing and switch costs were associated with a common 
episodic control process. These results support the notion that cognitive 
control may be conceptualised as an information processor that serves to resolve 
uncertainty in the environment.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0131556
PMCID: PMC4480360
PMID: 26107646 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.


582. Eur J Neurosci. 2018 Sep;48(6):2374-2384. doi: 10.1111/ejn.14137. Epub 2018 Sep 
16.

Enhanced motivation of cognitive control in Parkinson's disease.

Timmer MHM(1)(2), Aarts E(2), Esselink RAJ(1)(2), Cools R(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, Centre for Cognitive 
Neuroimaging, Radboud University, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(2)Department of Neurology and Parkinson Centre Nijmegen (ParC), Radboud 
University Medical Centre, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(3)Department of Psychiatry, Radboud University Medical Centre, Nijmegen, The 
Netherlands.

Motor and cognitive deficits in Parkinson's disease (PD) have been argued to 
reflect motivational deficits. In prior work, however, we have shown that 
motivation of cognitive control is paradoxically potentiated rather than 
impaired in Parkinson's disease. This is particularly surprising given the fact 
that Parkinson's disease is often accompanied by depression, a prototypical 
disorder of motivation. To replicate our previous finding and assess the effects 
of depression, we investigated performance of PD patients with (n = 22) and 
without depression (history) (n = 23) and age-matched healthy controls (n = 23) 
on a task specifically designed to measure the effect of reward motivation on 
task-switching. We replicated previous findings by showing contrasting effects 
of reward motivation on task-switching in PD patients and age-matched healthy 
controls. While the promise of high versus low reward improved task-switching in 
PD, it tended to impair task-switching in age-matched healthy controls. There 
were no effects of a depression (history) diagnosis in PD patients. These 
findings reinforce prior observations that Parkinson's disease is accompanied by 
enhanced incentive motivation of cognitive control and highlight the potential 
of incentive motivational strategies for overcoming cognitive deficits in 
Parkinson's disease.

© 2018 The Authors. European Journal of Neuroscience published by Federation of 
European Neuroscience Societies and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/ejn.14137
PMCID: PMC6175070
PMID: 30151991 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


583. Biol Psychol. 2017 Oct;129:253-264. doi: 10.1016/j.biopsycho.2017.09.008. Epub 
2017 Sep 18.

Frontoparietal theta oscillations during proactive control are associated with 
goal-updating and reduced behavioral variability.

Cooper PS(1), Wong ASW(2), McKewen M(3), Michie PT(3), Karayanidis F(4).

Author information:
(1)Functional Neuroimaging Laboratory, School of Psychology, The University of 
Newcastle, Australia; Priority Research Centre for Brain and Mental Health, The 
University of Newcastle, Australia; Priority Research Centre for Stroke and 
Brain Injury, The University of Newcastle, Australia; Hunter Medical Research 
Institute, The University of Newcastle, Australia.
(2)Functional Neuroimaging Laboratory, School of Psychology, The University of 
Newcastle, Australia; Priority Research Centre for Brain and Mental Health, The 
University of Newcastle, Australia; Priority Research Centre for Stroke and 
Brain Injury, The University of Newcastle, Australia; Hunter Medical Research 
Institute, The University of Newcastle, Australia; School of Electrical 
Engineering and Computing, The University of Newcastle, Australia.
(3)Functional Neuroimaging Laboratory, School of Psychology, The University of 
Newcastle, Australia; Priority Research Centre for Brain and Mental Health, The 
University of Newcastle, Australia; Hunter Medical Research Institute, The 
University of Newcastle, Australia.
(4)Functional Neuroimaging Laboratory, School of Psychology, The University of 
Newcastle, Australia; Priority Research Centre for Brain and Mental Health, The 
University of Newcastle, Australia; Priority Research Centre for Stroke and 
Brain Injury, The University of Newcastle, Australia; Hunter Medical Research 
Institute, The University of Newcastle, Australia. Electronic address: 
Frini.Karayanidis@newcastle.edu.au.

Low frequency oscillations in the theta range (4-8Hz) are increasingly 
recognized as having a crucial role in flexible cognition. Such evidence is 
typically derived from studies in the context of reactive (stimulus-driven) 
control processes. However, little research has explored the role of theta 
oscillations in preparatory control processes. In the current study, we explored 
the extent of theta oscillations during proactive cognitive control and 
determined if these oscillations were associated with behavior. Results 
supported a general role of theta oscillations during proactive cognitive 
control, with increased power and phase coherence during the preparatory cue 
interval. Further, theta oscillations across frontoparietal electrodes were also 
modulated by proactive control demands, with increased theta phase synchrony and 
power for cues signaling the need for goal updating. Finally, we present novel 
evidence of negative associations between behavioral variability and both power 
and phase synchrony across many of these frontoparietal electrodes that were 
associated with the need for goal updating. In particular, greater consistency 
in frontoparietal theta oscillations, indicated by increased theta phase and 
power during mixed-task blocks, resulted in more consistent task-switching 
performance. Together, these findings provide new insight into the temporal 
dynamics and functional relevance of theta oscillations during proactive 
cognitive control.

Copyright © 2017. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.biopsycho.2017.09.008
PMID: 28923361 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


584. J Exp Psychol Hum Percept Perform. 2012 Apr;38(2):367-74. doi: 10.1037/a0025858. 
Epub 2011 Oct 17.

Across-task priming revisited: response and task conflicts disentangled using 
ex-Gaussian distribution analysis.

Moutsopoulou K(1), Waszak F.

Author information:
(1)Laboratoire Psychologie de la Perception, CNRS-Université Paris Descartes, 
Centre Biomédical des Saints Pères, 45 Rue des Saints Pères, 75270 Paris Cedex 
06, France. k.moutsopoulou@cantab.net

The differential effects of task and response conflict in priming paradigms 
where associations are strengthened between a stimulus, a task, and a response 
have been demonstrated in recent years with neuroimaging methods. However, such 
effects are not easily disentangled with only measurements of behavior, such as 
reaction times (RTs). Here, we report the application of ex-Gaussian 
distribution analysis on task-switching RT data and show that conflict related 
to stimulus-response associations retrieved after a switch of tasks is reflected 
in the Gaussian component. By contrast, conflict related to the retrieval of 
stimulus-task associations is reflected in the exponential component. Our data 
confirm that the retrieval of stimulus-task and -response associations affects 
behavior differently. Ex-Gaussian distribution analysis is a useful tool for 
pulling apart these different levels of associative priming that are not 
distinguishable in analyses of RT means.

DOI: 10.1037/a0025858
PMID: 22004198 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


585. Psychol Res. 2011 Nov;75(6):535-43. doi: 10.1007/s00426-011-0354-3. Epub 2011 
Jun 29.

Are there control processes, and (if so) can they be studied?

Wylie GR(1), Sumowski JF, Murray M.

Author information:
(1)Kessler Foundation Research Center, West Orange, NJ 07052, USA. 
gwylie@kesslerfoundation.org

Generally, so-called control processes are thought to be necessary when we must 
perform one out of several competing actions. Some examples include performance 
of a less well-practiced action instead of a well-practiced one (prepotency); 
learning a new action (novelty); and rapidly switching from one action to 
another (task-switching). While it certainly is difficult to perform the desired 
action in these circumstances, it is less clear that a separate set of processes 
(e.g., control processes) are necessary to explain the observed behavior. 
Another way to approach the study of control processes is to investigate 
physiological dependent measures (e.g., electrophysiological or neuroimaging 
measures). Although these offer another avenue of inquiry into control 
processes, they have yet to furnish unambiguous evidence that control processes 
exist. While this might suggest that there are no control processes, it is also 
possible that our methods are insufficiently sensitive to measure control 
processes. We have investigated this latter possibility using tasks that are 
neuroanatomically distinct, though within the same modality (vision). This 
approach did not yield evidence for a separable set of control processes. 
However, recent works using a task-switching paradigm in which subjects switch 
between a visual and an auditory task suggest that switching both task and 
modality may be importantly different than switching task within a given 
modality. This may represent a way forward in the study of control processes.

DOI: 10.1007/s00426-011-0354-3
PMID: 21713443 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


586. Psychiatry Res. 2011 Jan 30;185(1-2):149-56. doi: 
10.1016/j.psychres.2010.04.044. Epub 2010 May 23.

Cognitive rigidity in unipolar depression and obsessive compulsive disorder: 
examination of task switching, Stroop, working memory updating and post-conflict 
adaptation.

Meiran N(1), Diamond GM, Toder D, Nemets B.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Beer-Sheva, 
Israel. nmeiran@bgu.ac.il

Obsessive compulsive disorder (OCD) and depressive rumination are both 
characterized by cognitive rigidity. We examined the performance of 17 patients 
(9 suffering from unipolar depression [UD] without OCD, and 8 suffering from OCD 
without UD), and 17 control participants matched on age, gender, language and 
education, on a battery covering the four main executive functions. Results 
indicated that, across both disorders, patients required more trials to adjust 
to single-task conditions after experiencing task switching, reflecting slow 
disengagement from switching mode, and showed abnormal post-conflict adaptation 
of processing mode following high conflict Stroop trials in comparison to 
controls. Rumination, which was elevated in UD and not in OCD, was associated 
with poor working memory updating and less task preparation. The results show 
that OCD and UD are associated with similar cognitive rigidity in the presently 
tested paradigms.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.psychres.2010.04.044
PMID: 20580836 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


587. Bipolar Disord. 2005;7 Suppl 5:43-52. doi: 10.1111/j.1399-5618.2005.00254.x.

Executive functioning and theory of mind in euthymic bipolar disorder.

Olley AL(1), Malhi GS, Bachelor J, Cahill CM, Mitchell PB, Berk M.

Author information:
(1)School of Psychiatry, Black Dog Institute, University of New South Wales, 
Sydney, NSW, Australia.

OBJECTIVES: To examine the nature of executive deficits in euthymic patients 
with bipolar disorder (BD).
METHODS: Fifteen euthymic BD patients and 13 controls were administered a 
battery of executive tasks including verbal fluency, Stroop, Theory of Mind 
(ToM) tests and selected subtests from the Cambridge Neuropsychological Test 
Automated Battery (CANTAB). Self-report and clinician ratings of mood and social 
and occupational functioning were also obtained.
RESULTS: There were no significant differences between BD patients and controls 
on the primary measures of the following executive tasks: verbal fluency, 
attentional set-shifting, problem solving or planning. On secondary measures of 
speed, BD patients were slower to complete the first trial of the Stroop task (p 
= 0.001). Patients with BD committed more errors across all secondary measures. 
Patients performed poorly when compared with controls on tests of verbal ToM (p 
= 0.02), and although they performed non-verbal ToM tasks at a level comparable 
to controls (p = 0.60), they were slower to initiate a response (p = 0.006). ToM 
was not significantly correlated with any measure of social and occupational 
functioning; however it correlated with the achievement scores of the CANTAB 
Stockings of Cambridge task (Pearson's r = 0.68, p < 0.01).
CONCLUSIONS: Deficits found in euthymic bipolar patients suggest 
fronto-subcortical pathway dysfunction. This is consistent with other 
neuropsychological and neuroimaging research that points to a trait deficit in 
BD. Further investigation is necessary perhaps using more real-world tests.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1399-5618.2005.00254.x
PMID: 16225560 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


588. J Cogn Neurosci. 2000 Jan;12(1):142-62. doi: 10.1162/089892900561931.

Contrasting cortical and subcortical activations produced by attentional-set 
shifting and reversal learning in humans.

Rogers RD(1), Andrews TC, Grasby PM, Brooks DJ, Robbins TW.

Author information:
(1)University of Cambridge and Medical Research Council, United Kingdom. 
robert.rogers@psychiatry.oxford.ac.uk

Much evidence suggests that lesions of the prefrontal cortex (PFC) produce 
marked impairments in the ability of subjects to shift cognitive set, as 
exemplified by performance of the Wisconsin Card Sorting Test (WCST). However, 
studies with humans and experimental primates have suggested that damage to 
different regions of PFC induce dissociable impairments in two forms of shift 
learning implicit in the WCST (that is, extradimensional (ED) shift learning and 
reversal shift learning), with similar deficits also being apparent after damage 
to basal ganglia structures, especially the caudate nucleus. In this study, we 
used the same visual discrimination learning paradigm over multidimensional 
stimuli, and the H215O positron emission tomography (PET) technique, to examine 
regional cerebral blood flow (rCBF) changes associated with these subcomponent 
processes of the WCST. In three conditions, subjects were scanned while 
acquiring visual discriminations involving either (i) the same stimulus 
dimension as preceding discriminations (intradimensional (ID) shifts); (ii) 
different stimulus dimensions from previous discriminations (ED shifts) or (iii) 
reversed stimulus-reward contingencies (reversal shifts). Additionally, subjects 
were scanned while responding to already learnt discriminations ('performance 
baseline'). ED shift learning, relative to ID shift learning, produced 
activations in prefrontal regions, including left anterior PFC and right 
dorsolateral PFC (BA 10 and 9&frasl;46). By contrast, reversal learning, 
relative to ID shift learning, produced activations of the left caudate nucleus. 
Additionally, compared to reversal and ID shift learning, ED shift learning was 
associated with relative deactivations in occipito-temporal pathways (for 
example, BA 17 and 37). These results confirm that, in the context of visual 
discrimination learning over multidimensional stimuli, the control of an 
acquired attentional bias or'set', and the control of previously acquired 
stimulus-reinforcement associations, activate distinct cortical and subcortical 
neural stations. Moreover, we propose that the PFC may contribute to the control 
of attentional-set by modulating attentional processes mediated by 
occipito-temporal pathways.

DOI: 10.1162/089892900561931
PMID: 10769312 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


589. Brain Res Bull. 2005 Nov 15;67(5):382-90. doi: 
10.1016/j.brainresbull.2005.06.010. Epub 2005 Jul 11.

Reward-based decision-making and aging.

Marschner A(1), Mell T, Wartenburger I, Villringer A, Reischies FM, Heekeren HR.

Author information:
(1)Berlin NeuroImaging Center, Charité, Campus Mitte, Schumannstr. 20/21, 10117 
Berlin, Germany. hauke.heekeren@charite.de

Healthy aging is associated with a number of neuroanatomical and neurobiological 
alterations that result in various cognitive changes. Both, the dopaminergic as 
well as the serotonergic system are subject to change during aging. Receptor 
loss and severe structural changes in PFC and striatum have been reported. Aging 
is associated with a progressive decline in several cognitive functions, such as 
episodic memory, working memory, and processing speed. Furthermore, it is 
associated with deficits in tasks requiring adaptation to external feedback of 
right or wrong, or task-switching. Here, we develop the hypothesis that this 
loss of behavioral flexibility is caused by structural and functional 
alterations of the reward system leading to impairments in reward processing, 
learning stimulus reinforcement associations, and reward-based decision-making. 
We review (a) data on neural correlates and substrates of reward processing in 
young healthy animals and humans, (b) evidence for age related functional and 
structural alterations of the reward system, and (c) behavioral and neuroimaging 
data of age effects on reward-based decision-making processes. Implications for 
neuroeconomics and neurodegenerative diseases are discussed.

DOI: 10.1016/j.brainresbull.2005.06.010
PMID: 16216684 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


590. J Nucl Med. 1998 Feb;39(2):350-6.

Signal-enhancing switched protocols to study higher-order cognitive tasks with 
PET.

Moreno-Cantú JJ(1), Reutens DC, Thompson CJ, Zatorre RJ, Klein D, Meyer E, 
Petrides M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology and Neurosurgery, Montreal Neurological Institute, 
McGill University, Quebec, Canada.

We tested the effectiveness of a switched protocol when it is used to detect 
signals that result from the study of a higher-order cognitive task with PET. 
Using language tasks that have been studied extensively in our laboratories, we 
compared the signal-to-noise ratio (S/N) and statistical significance of the 
activation signals detected in PET images of regional cerebral blood flow 
(rCBF), obtained using a standard activation protocol, and of activity 
concentration, obtained using a switched protocol.
METHODS: Four volunteers were studied with PET while they were performing 
synonym-generation and word-repetition tasks (activation and baseline tasks, 
respectively). Each volunteer had three activation/baseline and three baseline/ 
activation scans. Data for each scan were collected in two frames (60 and 120 
sec long). During the first 60 sec, data were collected using a standard 
activation protocol. Subjects then switched tasks, and acquisition continued for 
120 sec. Two images were obtained from each scan: an rCBF image using the first 
frame and an activity-concentration image using both frames. Images were 
transformed into Talairach space, subtracted and averaged within and across 
subjects. Parametric t-statistic images were generated for each protocol, and 
the magnitude and significance of the activation signals yielded by the two 
acquisition methods were compared.
RESULTS: All the activation foci detected using measurements of rCBF were 
detected when the switched protocol was used; this protocol, in addition, 
yielded better S/N values. The cognitive component introduced by task-switching 
in switched protocols did not yield extra statistically significant foci. In 
single subjects, the average improvement in the signal significance from regions 
of activation, at a 95% confidence level, was between 6% and 25%. When scans 
were averaged across subjects, the switched protocol yielded improvements in 
signal statistical significance of up to 38%.
CONCLUSION: We present evidence suggesting that switched protocols can be used 
to study higher-order cognitive tasks and that they yield activation foci with 
S/N values that are greater than those of equivalent foci detected using an rCBF 
protocol. Switched protocols appear to be easy to apply to the testing of 
higher-order cognitive functions. However, the extra cognitive requirement of 
switching tasks during data acquisition may be a limiting factor when switched 
protocols are used to study memory processes.

PMID: 9476949 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


591. Front Psychol. 2014 Feb 7;5:71. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2014.00071. eCollection 2014.

Lifespan development of attentiveness in domestic dogs: drawing parallels with 
humans.

Wallis LJ(1), Range F(2), Müller CA(1), Serisier S(3), Huber L(2), Zsó V(2).

Author information:
(1)Clever Dog Lab, Messerli Research Institute, University of Veterinary 
Medicine Vienna, Medical University of Vienna and University of Vienna Vienna, 
Austria ; Department of Cognitive Biology, University of Vienna Vienna, Austria.
(2)Clever Dog Lab, Messerli Research Institute, University of Veterinary 
Medicine Vienna, Medical University of Vienna and University of Vienna Vienna, 
Austria.
(3)Royal Canin Research Center Aimargues, France.

Attention is pivotal to consciousness, perception, cognition, and working memory 
in all mammals, and therefore changes in attention over the lifespan are likely 
to influence development and aging of all of these functions. Due to their 
evolutionary and developmental history, the dog is being recognized as an 
important species for modeling human healthspan, aging and associated diseases. 
In this study, we investigated the normal lifespan development of attentiveness 
of pet dogs in naturalistic situations, and compared the resulting 
cross-sectional developmental trajectories with data from previous studies in 
humans. We tested a sample of 145 Border collies (6 months to 14 years) with 
humans and objects or food as attention attractors, in order to assess their 
attentional capture, sustained and selective attention, and sensorimotor 
abilities. Our results reveal differences in task relevance in sustained 
attentional performance when watching a human or a moving object, which may be 
explained by life-long learning processes involving such stimuli. During task 
switching we found that dogs' selective attention and sensorimotor abilities 
showed differences between age groups, with performance peaking at middle age. 
Dogs' sensorimotor abilities showed a quadratic distribution with age and were 
correlated with selective attention performance. Our results support the 
hypothesis that the development and senescence of sensorimotor and attentional 
control may be fundamentally interrelated. Additionally, attentional capture, 
sustained attention, and sensorimotor control developmental trajectories 
paralleled those found in humans. Given that the development of attention is 
similar across humans and dogs, we propose that the same regulatory mechanisms 
are likely to be present in both species. Finally, this cross-sectional study 
provides the first description of age group changes in attention over the 
lifespan of pet dogs.

DOI: 10.3389/fpsyg.2014.00071
PMCID: PMC3916763
PMID: 24570668


592. Front Psychol. 2011 Nov 8;2:318. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2011.00318. eCollection 
2011.

Variability in proactive and reactive cognitive control processes across the 
adult lifespan.

Karayanidis F(1), Whitson LR, Heathcote A, Michie PT.

Author information:
(1)Functional Neuroimaging Laboratory, School of Psychology, Centre for Brain 
and Mental Health Research, University of Newcastle Callaghan, NSW, Australia.

Task-switching paradigms produce a highly consistent age-related increase in 
mixing cost [longer response time (RT) on repeat trials in mixed-task than 
single-task blocks] but a less consistent age effect on switch cost (longer RT 
on switch than repeat trials in mixed-task blocks). We use two approaches to 
examine the adult lifespan trajectory of control processes contributing to 
mixing cost and switch cost: latent variables derived from an evidence 
accumulation model of choice, and event-related potentials (ERP) that temporally 
differentiate proactive (cue-driven) and reactive (target-driven) control 
processes. Under highly practiced and prepared task conditions, aging was 
associated with increasing RT mixing cost but reducing RT switch cost. Both 
effects were largely due to the same cause: an age effect for mixed-repeat 
trials. In terms of latent variables, increasing age was associated with slower 
non-decision processes, slower rate of evidence accumulation about the target, 
and higher response criterion. Age effects on mixing costs were evident only on 
response criterion, the amount of evidence required to trigger a decision, 
whereas age effects on switch cost were present for all three latent variables. 
ERPs showed age-related increases in preparation for mixed-repeat trials, 
anticipatory attention, and post-target interference. Cue-locked ERPs that are 
linked to proactive control were associated with early emergence of age 
differences in response criterion. These results are consistent with age effects 
on strategic processes controlling decision caution. Consistent with an 
age-related decline in cognitive flexibility, younger adults flexibly adjusted 
response criterion from trial-to-trial on mixed-task blocks, whereas older 
adults maintained a high criterion for all trials.

DOI: 10.3389/fpsyg.2011.00318
PMCID: PMC3210488
PMID: 22073037


593. Cogn Affect Behav Neurosci. 2021 Aug;21(4):698-716. doi: 
10.3758/s13415-021-00893-x. Epub 2021 May 7.

Neural systems underlying the learning of cognitive effort costs.

Sayalı C(1), Badre D(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cognitive, Linguistic, and Psychological Sciences, Brown 
University, Providence, RI, USA. ceyda_sayali@alumni.brown.edu.
(2)Department of Cognitive, Linguistic, and Psychological Sciences, Brown 
University, Providence, RI, USA.
(3)Brown Institute for Brain Sciences, Brown University, Providence, RI, USA.

People balance the benefits of cognitive work against the costs of cognitive 
effort. Models that incorporate prospective estimates of the costs of cognitive 
effort into decision making require a mechanism by which these costs are 
learned. However, it remains an open question what brain systems are important 
for this learning, particularly when learning is not tied explicitly to a 
decision about what task to perform. In this fMRI experiment, we parametrically 
manipulated the level of effort a task requires by increasing task switching 
frequency across six task contexts. In a scanned learning phase, participants 
implicitly learned about the task switching frequency in each context. In a 
subsequent test phase, participants made selections between pairs of these task 
contexts. We modeled learning within a reinforcement learning framework, and 
found that effort expectations that derived from task-switching probability and 
response time (RT) during learning were the best predictors of later choice 
behavior. Prediction errors (PE) from these two models were associated with FPN 
during distinct learning epochs. Specifically, PE derived from expected RT was 
most correlated with the fronto-parietal network early in learning, whereas PE 
derived from expected task switching frequency was correlated with the 
fronto-parietal network late in learning. These results suggest that multiple 
task-related factors are tracked by the brain while performing a task that can 
drive subsequent estimates of effort costs.

© 2021. The Psychonomic Society, Inc.

DOI: 10.3758/s13415-021-00893-x
PMID: 33959895 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


594. J Cogn Neurosci. 2021 Sep 1;33(10):2181-2196. doi: 10.1162/jocn_a_01752.

Neural Correlates of Task-order Preparation in Dual Tasks: An EEG Study.

Steinhauser R(1), Kübler S(2), Steinhauser M(1), Schubert T(2).

Author information:
(1)Catholic University of Eichstätt-Ingolstadt, Germany.
(2)Martin-Luther-University of Halle-Wittenberg, Germany.

Dual-task scenarios require a coordinated regulation of the processing order of 
component tasks in light of capacity limitations during response selection. A 
number of behavioral and neuroimaging findings suggest a distinct set of control 
processes involved in preparing this task order. In this study, we investigated 
electrophysiological correlates of task-order preparation in a variant of the 
overlapping dual-task paradigm with cue-determined task order that resulted in 
trials with blockwise fixed task order as well as trials with repeated and 
switched task order in blocks with variable task order. During the cue-stimulus 
interval, we found an earlier centroparietal order-mixing positivity and a later 
parietal order-switch positivity. A decoding approach based on multivariate 
pattern analysis showed that the order-mixing positivity is a necessary 
prerequisite for successful order selection, whereas the order-switch positivity 
appears to facilitate the implementation of a new task order after its 
selection. These correlates of order preparation share striking similarities to 
commonly found potentials involved in the preparation of individual tasks in the 
(single-)task-switching paradigm, which is strong empirical support for the 
account that the underlying preparatory processes are to be considered as 
higher-level control signals that are implemented independently of specific task 
representations.

© 2021 Massachusetts Institute of Technology.

DOI: 10.1162/jocn_a_01752
PMID: 34407198 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


595. J Clin Med. 2022 Oct 1;11(19):5838. doi: 10.3390/jcm11195838.

Altered Resting-State Network in Adolescents with Problematic Internet Use.

Siste K(1), Pandelaki J(2), Miyata J(3), Oishi N(4), Tsurumi K(3), Fujiwara 
H(5)(6)(7), Murai T(3), Nasrun MW(1), Wiguna T(1), Bardosono S(8), Sekartini 
R(9), Sarasvita R(10), Murtani BJ(1), Sen LT(1), Firdaus KK(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Faculty of Medicine, Universitas Indonesia-Dr. 
Cipto Mangunkusumo National Central General Hospital, Jakarta 10430, Indonesia.
(2)Department of Radiology, Faculty of Medicine, Universitas Indonesia-Dr. Cipto 
Mangunkusumo National Central General Hospital, Jakarta 10430, Indonesia.
(3)Department of Psychiatry, Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto University, 
Kyoto 606-8501, Japan.
(4)Medical Innovation Center, Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto University, 
Kyoto 606-8501, Japan.
(5)Department of Neuropsychiatry, Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto University, 
Kyoto 606-8501, Japan.
(6)Decentralized Big Data Team, RIKEN Center for Advanced Intelligence Project, 
Tokyo 103-0027, Japan.
(7)The General Research Division, Osaka University Research Center on Ethical, 
Legal, and Social Issues, Osaka 565-0871, Japan.
(8)Department of Clinical Nutrition, Faculty of Medicine, Universitas 
Indonesia-Dr. Cipto Mangunkusumo National Central General Hospital, Jakarta 
10430, Indonesia.
(9)Department of Pediatrics, Faculty of Medicine, Universitas Indonesia-Dr. 
Cipto Mangunkusumo National Central General Hospital, Jakarta 10430, Indonesia.
(10)Faculty of Psychology, Soegijapranata University, Central Java 50234, 
Indonesia.

Problematic internet use (PIU) is increasingly recognized as a mental health 
concern, particularly among adolescents. The resting-state functional 
connectivity (rsFC) of the triple-network model has been described 
inconsistently in PIU. Using resting-state fMRI (rsFMRI) and hypothesizing a 
lower rsFC between default mode (DMN) and central executive networks (CEN) but a 
higher rsFC within the salience network (SN), this study scrutinized the neural 
substrates of PIU adolescents. A total of 30 adolescents with PIU and 30 control 
subjects underwent rsFMRI. The severity of PIU was evaluated by the Internet 
Addiction Test. Additionally, personality traits as well as emotional and 
behavioral problems were evaluated by the Temperament and Character Inventory 
(TCI) and the Strength and Difficulties Questionnaire (SDQ), respectively. 
Focusing on the DMN, SN, and CEN, we compared rsFC values between PIU and the 
control. Subsequently, within the combined group of subjects, TCI and SDQ 
correlation and mediation effects were investigated. Higher rsFC values of the 
left lateral prefrontal cortex (LPFC(L)) with the left anterior insula (aIns(L)) 
were observed for PIU than for the control, while rsFCs of the LPFC(L) with the 
medial PFC (MPFC), LPFC(L), as well as with the right lateral parietal cortex 
(LP(R)) were lower for PIU. Among these significant group differences, the rsFC 
between the LPFC(L) and MPFC was mediated by emotional symptoms (standardized β 
= -0.12, 95% CI -0.29, -0.0052). The dysfunctional attention switching and 
incentive salience regulated by the SN were implicated as being a neural 
correlate of PIU, and this relationship would in part be explained by the 
emotional dysregulation associated with PIU in adolescents.

DOI: 10.3390/jcm11195838
PMCID: PMC9570959
PMID: 36233704

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


596. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2016 Jun 21;113(25):6967-72. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.1520527113. Epub 2016 Jun 6.

Neural mechanisms underlying the impact of daylong cognitive work on economic 
decisions.

Blain B(1), Hollard G(2), Pessiglione M(3).

Author information:
(1)Motivation, Brain and Behavior Team, Centre de NeuroImagerie de Recherche, 
Institut du Cerveau et de la Moelle épinière, Hôpital de la Pitié-Salpêtrière, 
75013 Paris, France; INSERM UMRS 1127, CNRS UMR 7225, Université Pierre et Marie 
Curie-Paris 6, 75005 Paris, France; Centre d'Economie de la Sorbonne, Université 
Paris 1, 75013 Paris, France.
(2)Centre d'Economie de la Sorbonne, Université Paris 1, 75013 Paris, France.
(3)Motivation, Brain and Behavior Team, Centre de NeuroImagerie de Recherche, 
Institut du Cerveau et de la Moelle épinière, Hôpital de la Pitié-Salpêtrière, 
75013 Paris, France; INSERM UMRS 1127, CNRS UMR 7225, Université Pierre et Marie 
Curie-Paris 6, 75005 Paris, France; mathias.pessiglione@gmail.com.

The ability to exert self-control is key to social insertion and professional 
success. An influential literature in psychology has developed the theory that 
self-control relies on a limited common resource, so that fatigue effects might 
carry over from one task to the next. However, the biological nature of the 
putative limited resource and the existence of carry-over effects have been 
matters of considerable controversy. Here, we targeted the activity of the 
lateral prefrontal cortex (LPFC) as a common substrate for cognitive control, 
and we prolonged the time scale of fatigue induction by an order of magnitude. 
Participants performed executive control tasks known to recruit the LPFC 
(working memory and task-switching) over more than 6 h (an approximate workday). 
Fatigue effects were probed regularly by measuring impulsivity in intertemporal 
choices, i.e., the propensity to favor immediate rewards, which has been found 
to increase under LPFC inhibition. Behavioral data showed that choice 
impulsivity increased in a group of participants who performed hard versions of 
executive tasks but not in control groups who performed easy versions or enjoyed 
some leisure time. Functional MRI data acquired at the start, middle, and end of 
the day confirmed that enhancement of choice impulsivity was related to a 
specific decrease in the activity of an LPFC region (in the left middle frontal 
gyrus) that was recruited by both executive and choice tasks. Our findings 
demonstrate a concept of focused neural fatigue that might be naturally induced 
in real-life situations and have important repercussions on economic decisions.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1520527113
PMCID: PMC4922197
PMID: 27274075 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


597. Prog Neurobiol. 2021 Aug;203:102077. doi: 10.1016/j.pneurobio.2021.102077. Epub 
2021 May 24.

Altered maturation and atypical cortical processing of spoken sentences in 
autism spectrum disorder.

Alho J(1), Bharadwaj H(2), Khan S(3), Mamashli F(3), Perrachione TK(4), Losh 
A(5), McGuiggan NM(6), Joseph RM(7), Hämäläinen MS(8), Kenet T(9).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, MA, USA; Athinoula A. Martinos Center for Biomedical Imaging, 
Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA. 
Electronic address: jalho@mgh.harvard.edu.
(2)Department of Neurology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, MA, USA; Department of Speech, Language, and Hearing Sciences, 
and Weldon School of Biomedical Engineering, Purdue University, West Lafayette, 
IN, USA.
(3)Department of Neurology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, MA, USA; Department of Radiology, Massachusetts General 
Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA; Athinoula A. Martinos Center 
for Biomedical Imaging, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, 
Boston, MA, USA.
(4)Department of Speech, Language, and Hearing Sciences, Boston University, 
Boston, MA, USA.
(5)Department of Neurology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, MA, USA; Graduate School of Education, University of California, 
Riverside, CA, USA.
(6)Department of Neurology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, MA, USA.
(7)Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology, Boston University School of Medicine, 
Boston, MA, USA.
(8)Department of Radiology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, MA, USA; Athinoula A. Martinos Center for Biomedical Imaging, 
Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(9)Department of Neurology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, MA, USA; Athinoula A. Martinos Center for Biomedical Imaging, 
Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA. 
Electronic address: tal.kenet@mgh.harvard.edu.

Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is associated with widespread receptive language 
impairments, yet the neural mechanisms underlying these deficits are poorly 
understood. Neuroimaging has shown that processing of socially-relevant sounds, 
including speech and non-speech, is atypical in ASD. However, it is unclear how 
the presence of lexical-semantic meaning affects speech processing in ASD. Here, 
we recorded magnetoencephalography data from individuals with ASD (N = 22, ages 
7-17, 4 females) and typically developing (TD) peers (N = 30, ages 7-17, 5 
females) during unattended listening to meaningful auditory speech sentences and 
meaningless jabberwocky sentences. After adjusting for age, ASD individuals 
showed stronger responses to meaningless jabberwocky sentences than to 
meaningful speech sentences in the same left temporal and parietal language 
regions where TD individuals exhibited stronger responses to meaningful speech. 
Maturational trajectories of meaningful speech responses were atypical in 
temporal, but not parietal, regions in ASD. Temporal responses were associated 
with ASD severity, while parietal responses were associated with aberrant 
involuntary attentional shifting in ASD. Our findings suggest a receptive speech 
processing dysfunction in ASD, wherein unattended meaningful speech elicits 
abnormal engagement of the language system, while unattended meaningless speech, 
filtered out in TD individuals, engages the language system through involuntary 
attention capture.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pneurobio.2021.102077
PMCID: PMC8500341
PMID: 34033856 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


598. Psychiatry Res Neuroimaging. 2017 Jul 30;265:87-97. doi: 
10.1016/j.pscychresns.2016.08.006. Epub 2016 Aug 19.

Switching between internally and externally focused attention in 
obsessive-compulsive disorder: Abnormal visual cortex activation and 
connectivity.

Stern ER(1), Muratore AF(2), Taylor SF(3), Abelson JL(3), Hof PR(4), Goodman 
WK(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, 
NY, United States; Fishberg Department of Neuroscience and Friedman Brain 
Institute, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, United States. 
Electronic address: emily.stern@mssm.edu.
(2)Department of Psychology, Drexel University, Philadelphia, PA, United States.
(3)Department of Psychiatry, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, United 
States.
(4)Fishberg Department of Neuroscience and Friedman Brain Institute, Icahn 
School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, United States.
(5)Department of Psychiatry, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, 
NY, United States; Fishberg Department of Neuroscience and Friedman Brain 
Institute, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, United States.

Comment in
    Front Psychol. 2017 Oct 16;8:1827. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2017.01827.

Obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) is characterized by excessive absorption 
with internally-generated distressing thoughts and urges, with difficulty 
incorporating external information running counter to their fears and concerns. 
In the present study, we experimentally probed this core feature of OCD through 
the use of a novel attention switching task that investigates transitions 
between internally focused (IF) and externally focused (EF) attentional states. 
Eighteen OCD patients and 18 controls imagined positive and negative personal 
event scenarios (IF state) or performed a color-word Stroop task (EF state). The 
IF/EF states were followed by a target detection (TD) task requiring responses 
to external stimuli. Compared to controls, OCD patients made significantly more 
errors and showed reduced activation of superior and inferior occipital cortex, 
thalamus, and putamen during TD following negative IF, with the inferior 
occipital hypoactivation being significantly greater for TD following negative 
IF compared to TD following the other conditions. Patients showed stronger 
functional connectivity between the inferior occipital region and dorsomedial 
prefrontal cortex. These findings point to an OCD-related impairment in the 
visual processing of external stimuli specifically when they follow a period of 
negative internal focus, and suggest that future treatments may wish to target 
the transition between attentional states.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pscychresns.2016.08.006
PMCID: PMC5316503
PMID: 28024845 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: All authors declare no conflicts of interest.


599. Front Aging Neurosci. 2018 Jan 8;9:433. doi: 10.3389/fnagi.2017.00433. 
eCollection 2017.

Physiological Aging Influence on Brain Hemodynamic Activity during 
Task-Switching: A fNIRS Study.

Vasta R(1), Cutini S(2), Cerasa A(3)(4), Gramigna V(1), Olivadese G(3), Arabia 
G(4), Quattrone A(1)(3)(5).

Author information:
(1)Neuroscience Research Center, University Magna Graecia, Catanzaro, Italy.
(2)Department of Developmental Psychology, University of Padova, Padova, Italy.
(3)Institute of Bioimaging and Molecular Physiology, Neuroimaging Research 
Center, Consiglio Nazionale Delle Ricerche (CNR), Catanzaro, Italy.
(4)Institute S. Anna, Research in Advanced Neurorehabilitation, Crotone, Italy.
(5)Institute of Neurology, Department of Medical and Surgical Sciences, 
University Magna Graecia, Catanzaro, Italy.

Task-switching (TS) paradigm is a well-known validated tool useful for exploring 
the neural substrates of cognitive control, in particular the activity of the 
lateral and medial prefrontal cortex. This work is aimed at investigating how 
physiological aging influences hemodynamic response during the execution of a 
color-shape TS paradigm. A multi-channel near infrared spectroscopy (fNIRS) was 
used to measure hemodynamic activity in 27 young (30.00 ± 7.90 years) and 11 
elderly participants (57.18 ± 9.29 years) healthy volunteers (55% male, age 
range: (19-69) years) during the execution of a TS paradigm. Two holders were 
placed symmetrically over the left/right hemispheres to record cortical activity 
[oxy-(HbO) and deoxy-hemoglobin (HbR) concentration] of the dorso-lateral 
prefrontal cortex (DLPFC), the dorsal premotor cortex (PMC), and the 
dorso-medial part of the superior frontal gyrus (sFG). TS paradigm requires 
participants to repeat the same task over a variable number of trials, and then 
to switch to a different task during the trial sequence. A two-sample t-test was 
carried out to detect differences in cortical responses between groups. Multiple 
linear regression analysis was used to evaluate the impact of age on the 
prefrontal neural activity. Elderly participants were significantly slower than 
young participants in both color- (p < 0.01, t = -3.67) and shape-single tasks 
(p = 0.026, t = -2.54) as well as switching (p = 0.026, t = -2.41) and 
repetition trials (p = 0.012, t = -2.80). Differences in cortical activation 
between groups were revealed for HbO mean concentration of switching task in the 
PMC (p = 0.048, t = 2.94). In the whole group, significant increases of 
behavioral performance were detected in switching trials, which positively 
correlated with aging. Multivariate regression analysis revealed that the HbO 
mean concentration of switching task in the PMC (p = 0.01, β = -0.321) and of 
shape single-task in the sFG (p = 0.003, β = 0.342) were the best predictors of 
age effects. Our findings demonstrated that TS might be a reliable instrument to 
gather a measure of cognitive resources in older people. Moreover, the 
fNIRS-related brain activity extracted from frontoparietal cortex might become a 
useful indicator of aging effects.

DOI: 10.3389/fnagi.2017.00433
PMCID: PMC5767724
PMID: 29375363


600. Front Psychiatry. 2025 Jan 6;15:1507890. doi: 10.3389/fpsyt.2024.1507890. 
eCollection 2024.

Reduced prefrontal hemodynamic responses measured using near-infrared 
spectroscopy in adults with autism spectrum disorder.

Kamikawa K(1), Yamamuro K(1)(2), Mizui R(1), Kashida N(1), Ishida R(1)(3)(4), 
Okada T(1), Iwata N(3), Makinodan M(1)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Nara Medical University School of Medicine, 
Kashihara, Japan.
(2)Center for Health Control, Nara Medical University School of Medicine, 
Kashihara, Japan.
(3)Department of Psychiatry, Fujita Health University School of Medicine, 
Toyoake, Japan.
(4)Division of Transformative Psychiatry and Synergistic Research, International 
Center for Brain Science, Fujita Health University, Toyoake, Japan.

AIM: Functional neuroimaging studies have suggested that prefrontal cortex 
dysfunction occurs in individuals with autism spectrum disorder (ASD). 
Near-infrared spectroscopy (NIRS) is a noninvasive optical tool used to 
investigate oxygenation and hemodynamic responses in the cerebral cortex by 
measuring changes in oxygenated hemoglobin. Previous studies using NIRS have 
suggested that male children with ASD exhibit reduced hemodynamic responses in 
the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex; however, only a few studies examined this 
response in adults with ASD.
METHODS: We examined the characteristics of prefrontal hemodynamic responses in 
114 adults with ASD and 84 typically developing controls. Relative 
concentrations of oxygenated hemoglobin were measured with frontal probes every 
0.1 s during the Stroop color-word task, using 24-channel NIRS.
RESULTS: Our findings demonstrated that the oxygenated hemoglobin changes in the 
ASD group were significantly smaller than those in the control group at channels 
19, 20, 23, and 24- located over the orbitofrontal cortex and frontal pole (p 
<0.05 for all three channels). The differences in oxygenated hemoglobin changes 
at Ch 20 were significantly correlated with the Autism-Spectrum Quotient 
Japanese version (AQ-J) total score and attention switching score, which is a 
symptom cluster of AQ-J (p = 0.043 and p = 0.009, respectively).
CONCLUSION: Adults with ASD have reduced prefrontal hemodynamic responses as 
measured using near-infrared spectroscopy and the reduced activity of the 
frontal pole in particular is related to reduced attentional function.

Copyright © 2025 Kamikawa, Yamamuro, Mizui, Kashida, Ishida, Okada, Iwata and 
Makinodan.

DOI: 10.3389/fpsyt.2024.1507890
PMCID: PMC11743530
PMID: 39834576

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest. The author(s) declared that 
they were an editorial board member of Frontiers, at the time of submission. 
This had no impact on the peer review process and the final decision.


601. J Neurosci. 2010 Oct 27;30(43):14552-9. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2631-10.2010.

Differential contributions of the primate ventrolateral prefrontal and 
orbitofrontal cortex to serial reversal learning.

Rygula R(1), Walker SC, Clarke HF, Robbins TW, Roberts AC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental Psychology and Behavioural and Clinical 
Neuroscience Institute, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 3EB, United 
Kingdom. rr362@cam.ac.uk

The discrimination reversal paradigm is commonly used to measure a subject's 
ability to adapt their behavior according to changes in stimulus-reward 
contingencies. Human functional neuroimaging studies have demonstrated 
activations in the lateral orbitofrontal cortex (OFC) and the inferior frontal 
gyrus (IFG) in subjects performing this task. Excitotoxic lesions of analogous 
regions in marmosets have revealed, however, that although the OFC is indeed 
critical for reversal learning, ventrolateral prefrontal cortex (VLPFC) 
(analogous to IFG) is not, contributing instead to higher order processing, such 
as that required in attentional set-shifting and strategy transfer. One major 
difference between the marmoset and human studies has been the level of training 
subjects received in reversal learning, being far greater in the latter. Since 
exposure to repeated contingency changes, as occurs in serial reversal learning, 
is likely to trigger the development of higher order, rule-based strategies, we 
hypothesized a critical role of the marmoset VLPFC in performance of a serial 
reversal learning paradigm. After extensive training in reversal learning, 
marmosets received an excitotoxic lesion of the VLPFC, OFC, or a sham control 
procedure. In agreement with our prediction, postsurgery, VLPFC lesioned animals 
were impaired in performing a series of discrimination reversals, but only when 
novel visual stimuli were introduced. In contrast, OFC lesioned animals were 
impaired regardless of whether the visual stimuli were the same or different 
from those used during presurgery training. Together, these data demonstrate the 
heterogeneous but interrelated involvement of primate OFC and VLPFC in the 
performance of serial reversal learning.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2631-10.2010
PMCID: PMC3044865
PMID: 20980613 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


602. Sci Rep. 2024 Jan 4;14(1):479. doi: 10.1038/s41598-023-49456-9.

The impact of perceptual complexity on road crossing decisions in younger and 
older adults.

Nicholls VI(1)(2), Wiener J(3), Meso AI(4), Miellet S(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology and Sports Sciences, Goethe University, Frankfurt, 
Germany. nicholls@psych.uni-frankfurt.de.
(2)Department of Psychology, Bournemouth University, Poole, UK. 
nicholls@psych.uni-frankfurt.de.
(3)Department of Psychology, Bournemouth University, Poole, UK.
(4)Neuroimaging Department, King's College London, London, UK.
(5)Department of Psychology, University of Wollongong, Wollongong, Australia.

Cognitive abilities decline with healthy ageing which can have a critical impact 
on day-to-day activities. One example is road crossing where older adults (OAs) 
disproportionally fall victim to pedestrian accidents. The current research 
examined two virtual reality experiments that investigated how the complexity of 
the road crossing situation impacts OAs (N = 19, ages 65-85) and younger adults 
(YAs, N = 34, ages 18-24) with a range of executive functioning abilities (EFs). 
Overall, we found that OAs were able to make safe crossing decisions, and were 
more cautious than YAs. This continued to be the case in high cognitive load 
situations. In these situations, safe decisions were associated with an increase 
in head movements for participants with poorer attention switching than 
participants with better attention switching suggesting these groups developed 
compensation strategies to continue to make safe decisions. In situations where 
participants had less time to make a crossing decision all participants had 
difficulties making safe crossing decisions which was amplified for OAs and 
participants with poorer EFs. Our findings suggest more effort should be taken 
to ensure that road crossing points are clear of visual obstructions and more 
speed limits should be placed around retirement or care homes, neither of which 
are legislated for in the UK and Australia.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-023-49456-9
PMCID: PMC10767050
PMID: 38177216 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.


603. Trends Neurosci. 2015 Sep;38(9):571-8. doi: 10.1016/j.tins.2015.07.003.

Demystifying cognitive flexibility: Implications for clinical and developmental 
neuroscience.

Dajani DR(1), Uddin LQ(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Miami, Coral Gables, FL, USA.
(2)Department of Psychology, University of Miami, Coral Gables, FL, USA; 
Neuroscience Program, University of Miami Miller School of Medicine, Miami, FL, 
USA. Electronic address: l.uddin@miami.edu.

Cognitive flexibility, the readiness with which one can selectively switch 
between mental processes to generate appropriate behavioral responses, develops 
in a protracted manner and is compromised in several prevalent 
neurodevelopmental disorders. It is unclear whether cognitive flexibility arises 
from neural substrates distinct from the executive control network (ECN) or from 
the interplay of nodes within this and other networks. Here we review 
neuroimaging studies of cognitive flexibility, focusing on set shifting and task 
switching. We propose that more consistent operationalization and study of 
cognitive flexibility is required in clinical and developmental neuroscience. We 
suggest that an important avenue for future research is the characterization of 
the relationship between neural flexibility and cognitive flexibility in typical 
and atypical development.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.tins.2015.07.003
PMCID: PMC5414037
PMID: 26343956 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


604. Psychiatry Res. 2013 Dec 30;210(3):1265-74. doi: 10.1016/j.psychres.2013.09.028. 
Epub 2013 Oct 2.

No clear evidence for a positive association between the interpersonal-affective 
aspects of psychopathy and executive functioning.

Maes JH(1), Brazil IA.

Author information:
(1)Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, Radboud University 
Nijmegen, P.O. Box 9104, 6500 HE Nijmegen, The Netherlands. Electronic address: 
r.maes@donders.ru.nl.

Common psychopathy rating instruments distinguish between an 
interpersonal-affective and an antisocial dimension. The suggestion that the 
interpersonal-affective dimension, often considered to be the core feature of 
psychopathy, is positively associated with executive functioning is occasionally 
made in the literature, without reporting objective empirical data. The primary 
aim of the present paper was to search for empirical studies reporting relevant 
data, focussing on four aspects of 'cold' executive functioning: inhibition, 
attentional shifting, working memory, and planning. Eleven published articles 
were identified, reporting data of 721 individuals from incarcerated and 
non-incarcerated, male and female, and adult and non-adult samples. Using a 
heterogeneous set of tests and dependent measures across studies, the inhibition 
and attentional shifting components were assessed in eight and five studies, 
respectively; the working memory and planning components each in two studies. A 
small majority of the studies found positive associations with the different 
executive functions, although the associations were mostly non-significant. 
Given the scarcity of studies and the use of heterogeneous populations, tests 
and statistical analyses, no robust conclusions can be drawn at this stage. 
Therefore, caution is needed when claiming a positive association between the 
interpersonal-affective features of psychopathy and executive functioning. 
Clearly more research is needed to further validate and specify the suggested 
association.

© 2013 Published by Elsevier Ireland Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.psychres.2013.09.028
PMID: 24140251 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


605. Front Neurosci. 2018 Mar 8;12:143. doi: 10.3389/fnins.2018.00143. eCollection 
2018.

Event-Related Potential Responses to Task Switching Are Sensitive to Choice of 
Spatial Filter.

Wong ASW(1)(2), Cooper PS(1)(2)(3), Conley AC(1)(2)(4), McKewen M(1)(3), Fulham 
WR(1)(3), Michie PT(1)(3), Karayanidis F(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Functional Neuroimaging Laboratory, School of Psychology, University of 
Newcastle, Callaghan, NSW, Australia.
(2)Priority Research Centre for Stroke and Brain Injury, University of 
Newcastle, Callaghan, NSW, Australia.
(3)Priority Research Centre for Brain and Mental Health, University of 
Newcastle, Callaghan, NSW, Australia.
(4)Department of Psychiatry, Center for Cognitive Medicine, Vanderbilt 
University Medical Center, Nashville, TN, United States.

Event-related potential (ERP) studies using the task-switching paradigm show 
that multiple ERP components are modulated by activation of proactive control 
processes involved in preparing to repeat or switch task and reactive control 
processes involved in implementation of the current or new task. Our 
understanding of the functional significance of these ERP components has been 
hampered by variability in their robustness, as well as their temporal and scalp 
distribution across studies. The aim of this study is to examine the effect of 
choice of reference electrode or spatial filter on the number, timing and scalp 
distribution of ERP elicited during task-switching. We compared four 
configurations, including the two most common (i.e., average mastoid reference 
and common average reference) and two novel ones that aim to reduce volume 
conduction (i.e., reference electrode standardization technique (REST) and 
surface Laplacian) on mixing cost and switch cost effects in cue-locked and 
target-locked ERP waveforms in 201 healthy participants. All four spatial 
filters showed the same well-characterized ERP components that are typically 
seen in task-switching paradigms: the cue-locked switch positivity and 
target-locked N2/P3 effect. However, both the number of ERP effects associated 
with mixing and switch cost, and their temporal and spatial resolution were 
greater with the surface Laplacian transformation which revealed rapid temporal 
adjustments that were not identifiable with other spatial filters. We conclude 
that the surface Laplacian transformation may be more suited to characterize EEG 
signatures of complex spatiotemporal networks involved in cognitive control.

DOI: 10.3389/fnins.2018.00143
PMCID: PMC5852402
PMID: 29568260


606. Acta Psychol (Amst). 2012 Jan;139(1):124-36. doi: 10.1016/j.actpsy.2011.09.004. 
Epub 2011 Oct 14.

Task practice differentially modulates task-switching performance across the 
adult lifespan.

Whitson LR(1), Karayanidis F, Michie PT.

Author information:
(1)Functional Neuroimaging Laboratory, School of Psychology, Centre for Brain 
and Mental Health Research, University of Newcastle, Australia.

Cued-trials task-switching paradigms have been used extensively to examine 
ageing-related changes in cognitive control. Many studies report an increase in 
mixing cost (i.e., cost of repeating the same task in a single-task vs. a 
mixed-task block) and a less reliable increase in switch cost (i.e., cost of 
switching vs. repeating tasks in a mixed-task block) in old as compared to young 
adults. However, there is substantial variability between studies in the 
emergence and size of age effects on mixing and/or switch cost. In this study, 
we examined variation in mixing cost and switch cost as a function of task 
practice and preparation interval across the adult lifespan (18-79 years) using 
a paradigm that promotes advance preparation and reduces cue encoding 
differences between switch and repeat trials. Both preparation interval and task 
practice modulated mixing cost and switch cost-but task practice mediated the 
effects of preparation interval and age differentially for mixing cost and 
switch cost. Mixing cost was consistently larger in older participants, reduced 
with preparation and varied little with task practice. In contrast, the effect 
of preparation interval on switch cost varied with task practice. Reduction in 
switch cost with preparation interval emerged in younger participants by the 
second practice session and even later in older participants. When fully 
practiced, older participants showed greater mixing cost but less switch cost 
than younger participants. Age effects on both mixing cost and switch cost were 
mediated by changes in processing of repeat trials, indicative of reduced 
differentiation between switch and repeat trials in mixed-task blocks. This is 
consistent with reduced cognitive flexibility with increasing age.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.actpsy.2011.09.004
PMID: 22000521 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


607. Front Behav Neurosci. 2019 Jan 17;12:338. doi: 10.3389/fnbeh.2018.00338. 
eCollection 2018.

The Cognitive Drivers of Compulsive Eating Behavior.

Kakoschke N(1), Aarts E(2), Verdejo-García A(1).

Author information:
(1)Monash Institute for Cognitive and Clinical Neurosciences (MICCN), School of 
Psychological Sciences, Monash University, Melbourne, VIC, Australia.
(2)Donders Centre for Cognitive Neuroimaging, Donders Institute for Brain, 
Cognition and Behaviour, Radboud University, Nijmegen, Netherlands.

Erratum in
    Front Behav Neurosci. 2019 Oct 01;13:230. doi: 10.3389/fnbeh.2019.00230.

Compulsivity is a central feature of obsessive-compulsive and addictive 
disorders, which share considerable overlap with excessive eating in terms of 
repetitive behavior despite negative consequences. Excessive eating behavior is 
characteristic of several eating-related conditions, including eating disorders 
[bulimia nervosa (BN), binge eating disorder (BED)], obesity, and food addiction 
(FA). Compulsivity is proposed to be driven by four distinct cognitive 
components, namely, contingency-related cognitive flexibility, task/attentional 
set-shifting, attentional bias/disengagement and habit learning. However, it is 
unclear whether repetitive behavior in eating-related conditions is underpinned 
by deficits in these cognitive components. The current mini-review synthesizes 
the available evidence for performance on compulsivity-related cognitive tasks 
for each cognitive domain among populations with excessive eating behavior. In 
three of the four cognitive domains, i.e., set-shifting, attentional bias and 
habit learning, findings were mixed. Evidence more strongly pointed towards 
impaired contingency-related cognitive flexibility only in obesity and 
attentional bias/disengagement deficits only in obesity and BED. Overall, the 
findings of the reviewed studies support the idea that compulsivity-related 
cognitive deficits are common across a spectrum of eating-related conditions, 
although evidence was inconsistent or lacking for some disorders. We discuss the 
theoretical and practical importance of these results, and their implications 
for our understanding of compulsivity in eating-related conditions.

DOI: 10.3389/fnbeh.2018.00338
PMCID: PMC6344462
PMID: 30705625


608. Cogn Affect Behav Neurosci. 2019 Jun;19(3):653-676. doi: 
10.3758/s13415-019-00722-2.

Does cognitive control ability mediate the relationship between reward-related 
mechanisms, impulsivity, and maladaptive outcomes in adolescence and young 
adulthood?

McKewen M(1), Skippen P(1), Cooper PS(1)(2), Wong ASW(1)(2), Michie PT(1), 
Lenroot R(3), Karayanidis F(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Functional Neuroimaging Laboratory, School of Psychology, University of 
Newcastle, University Drive, Callaghan, NSW, 2308, Australia.
(2)Priority Research Centre for Stroke and Brain Injury, University of 
Newcastle, Callaghan, Australia.
(3)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, School of Medicine, 
University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, NM, USA.
(4)Functional Neuroimaging Laboratory, School of Psychology, University of 
Newcastle, University Drive, Callaghan, NSW, 2308, Australia. 
frini.karayanidis@newcastle.edu.au.
(5)Priority Research Centre for Stroke and Brain Injury, University of 
Newcastle, Callaghan, Australia. frini.karayanidis@newcastle.edu.au.

Neurobiological models explain increased risk-taking behaviours in adolescence 
and young adulthood as arising from staggered development of subcortical reward 
networks and prefrontal control networks. In this study, we examined whether 
individual variability in impulsivity and reward-related mechanisms is 
associated with higher level of engagement in risky behaviours and vulnerability 
to maladaptive outcomes and whether this relationship is mediated by cognitive 
control ability. A community sample of adolescents, young adults, and adults 
(age = 15-35 years) completed self-report measures and behavioural tasks of 
cognitive control, impulsivity, and reward-related mechanisms, and self-reported 
level of maladaptive outcomes. Behavioural, event-related potential (ERP), and 
multivariate pattern analysis (MVPA) measures of proactive control were derived 
from a task-switching paradigm. Adolescents, but not young adults, reported 
higher levels of impulsivity, reward-seeking behaviours and maladaptive outcomes 
than adults. They also had lower cognitive control ability, as measured by both 
self-report and task-based measures. Consistent with models of risk-taking 
behaviour, self-reported level of cognitive control mediated the relationship 
between self-reported levels of impulsivity and psychological distress, but the 
effect was not moderated by age. In contrast, there was no mediation effect of 
behavioural or EEG-based measures of cognitive control. These findings suggest 
that individual variability in cognitive control is more crucial to the 
relationship between risk-taking/impulsivity and outcomes than age itself. They 
also highlight large differences in measurement between self-report and 
task-based measures of cognitive control and decision-making under reward 
conditions, which should be considered in any studies of cognitive control.

DOI: 10.3758/s13415-019-00722-2
PMID: 31119652 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


609. PLoS One. 2012;7(5):e37961. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0037961. Epub 2012 May 30.

Do musicians with perfect pitch have more autism traits than musicians without 
perfect pitch? An empirical study.

Dohn A(1), Garza-Villarreal EA, Heaton P, Vuust P.

Author information:
(1)Center of Functionally Integrative Neuroscience, University of Aarhus, 
Aarhus, Denmark. dohn@pet.auh.dk

Perfect pitch, also known as absolute pitch (AP), refers to the rare ability to 
identify or produce a musical tone correctly without the benefit of an external 
reference. AP is often considered to reflect musical giftedness, but it has also 
been associated with certain disabilities due to increased prevalence of AP in 
individuals with sensory and developmental disorders. Here, we determine whether 
individual autistic traits are present in people with AP. We quantified 
subclinical levels of autism traits using the Autism-Spectrum Quotient (AQ) in 
three matched groups of subjects: 16 musicians with AP (APs), 18 musicians 
without AP (non-APs), and 16 non-musicians. In addition, we measured AP ability 
by a pitch identification test with sine wave tones and piano tones. We found a 
significantly higher degree of autism traits in APs than in non-APs and 
non-musicians, and autism scores were significantly correlated with pitch 
identification scores (r = .46, p = .003). However, our results showed that APs 
did not differ from non-APs on diagnostically crucial social and communicative 
domain scores and their total AQ scores were well below clinical thresholds for 
autism. Group differences emerged on the imagination and attention switching 
subscales of the AQ. Thus, whilst these findings do link AP with autism, they 
also show that AP ability is most strongly associated with personality traits 
that vary widely within the normal population.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0037961
PMCID: PMC3364198
PMID: 22666425 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.


610. Psychiatry Res. 2004 Dec 30;129(3):229-39. doi: 10.1016/j.psychres.2004.09.007.

Stability of set-shifting and planning abilities in patients with schizophrenia.

Tyson PJ(1), Laws KR, Roberts KH, Mortimer AM.

Author information:
(1)School of Health and Social Sciences, University of Gloucestershire, Francis 
Close Hall Campus, Swindon Road, Cheltenham, Gloucestershire, GL50 4AZ, UK. 
ptyson@glos.ac.uk

Patients with schizophrenia have deficits in executive function that involve 
attentional set-shifting and planning ability. It is unclear, however, whether 
such deficits are stable during the course of the illness or if they fluctuate 
in response to medication effects or symptom changes. Patients with a DSM-IV 
diagnosis of schizophrenia (n=28) and healthy control subjects (n=17) were 
tested on computerised measures of attentional set-shifting and planning at 
baseline and 9-month follow-up. The measures used were the 
Intra/Extradimensional Shift test (ID/ED) and the Stockings of Cambridge test 
(SoC) from the Cambridge Automated Neuropsychological Testing Battery (CANTAB). 
On both tests, the patients were poorer than controls at baseline; however, 
there was no evidence of change over the 9-month follow-up. Additionally, there 
was little evidence of a relationship between executive test performance and 
medication or length of illness. This study accords with the presence of 
executive processing deficits in schizophrenia that are stable across time.

DOI: 10.1016/j.psychres.2004.09.007
PMID: 15661316 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


611. Front Aging Neurosci. 2017 Mar 23;9:69. doi: 10.3389/fnagi.2017.00069. 
eCollection 2017.

Limited Effects of Set Shifting Training in Healthy Older Adults.

Grönholm-Nyman P(1), Soveri A(1), Rinne JO(2), Ek E(3), Nyholm A(1), Stigsdotter 
Neely A(4), Laine M(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Åbo Akademi University Turku, Finland.
(2)Turku PET Centre, University of Turku Turku, Finland.
(3)Student Health Care Porvoo, Finland.
(4)Department of Social and Psychological Studies, Karlstad University Karlstad, 
Sweden.
(5)Department of Psychology, Åbo Akademi UniversityTurku, Finland; Turku Brain 
and Mind Center, University of TurkuTurku, Finland.

Our ability to flexibly shift between tasks or task sets declines in older age. 
As this decline may have adverse effects on everyday life of elderly people, it 
is of interest to study whether set shifting ability can be trained, and if 
training effects generalize to other cognitive tasks. Here, we report a 
randomized controlled trial where healthy older adults trained set shifting with 
three different set shifting tasks. The training group (n = 17) performed 
adaptive set shifting training for 5 weeks with three training sessions a week 
(45 min/session), while the active control group (n = 16) played three different 
computer games for the same period. Both groups underwent extensive pre- and 
post-testing and a 1-year follow-up. Compared to the controls, the training 
group showed significant improvements on the trained tasks. Evidence for near 
transfer in the training group was very limited, as it was seen only on overall 
accuracy on an untrained computerized set shifting task. No far transfer to 
other cognitive functions was observed. One year later, the training group was 
still better on the trained tasks but the single near transfer effect had 
vanished. The results suggest that computerized set shifting training in the 
elderly shows long-lasting effects on the trained tasks but very little benefit 
in terms of generalization.

DOI: 10.3389/fnagi.2017.00069
PMCID: PMC5362725
PMID: 28386226


612. Mov Disord. 2012 Sep 1;27(10):1262-7. doi: 10.1002/mds.25104. Epub 2012 Aug 1.

Anterior cingulate integrity: executive and neuropsychiatric features in 
Parkinson's disease.

Lewis SJ(1), Shine JM, Duffy S, Halliday G, Naismith SL.

Author information:
(1)Ageing Brain Center, Brain and Mind Research Institute, The University of 
Sydney, Sydney, New South Wales, Australia. simonl@med.usyd.edu.au

Patients with advanced Parkinson's disease (PD) commonly suffer with significant 
executive dysfunction and concomitant visual hallucinations. Although the 
underlying pathophysiology remains poorly understood, numerous studies have 
highlighted the strong association between these neuropsychiatric features, 
suggesting common neural pathways. Although previous neuroimaging studies have 
identified widespread volume loss across a number of cortical regions, to date, 
no studies have utilized proton magnetic resonance spectroscopy to provide 
insights into how neurometabolic changes may relate to such symptoms. Twenty 
patients with PD and 20 healthy controls underwent spectroscopy to determine the 
N-acetyl aspartate/creatine (NAA/Cr) ratio, which reflects the degree of 
neuronal integrity in neurodegenerative diseases. Voxels were obtained from the 
anterior cingulate cortex (ACC), an area critical for a wide range of executive 
mechanisms as well as from a control volume in the posterior cingulate cortex 
(PCC). Compared to controls, patients with PD had lower NAA/Cr ratios in the 
ACC. In turn, lower NAA/Cr ratios significantly correlated with poorer executive 
function on tasks of attentional set-shifting and response inhibition, as well 
as more-severe psychotic symptoms and poorer performance on the Bistable Percept 
Paradigm, a neuropsychological probe of visual hallucinations. NAA/Cr ratios 
were significantly lower in hallucinators, compared to nonhallucinators, within 
the ACC, but did not differ in the PCC. These results suggest that loss of 
neuronal integrity within the ACC plays an important role in the pathophysiology 
underlying executive functioning and visual hallucinations in PD. © 2012 
Movement Disorder Society.

Copyright © 2012 Movement Disorder Society.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.25104
PMID: 22865474 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


613. Cortex. 2020 Mar;124:176-187. doi: 10.1016/j.cortex.2019.11.007. Epub 2019 Dec 
3.

Executive function in children with Tourette syndrome and 
attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder: Cross-disorder or unique impairments?

Openneer TJC(1), Forde NJ(2), Akkermans SEA(3), Naaijen J(3), Buitelaar JK(4), 
Hoekstra PJ(5), Dietrich A(5).

Author information:
(1)University of Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen, Department of 
Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, Groningen, the Netherlands. Electronic address: 
t.openneer@accare.nl.
(2)University of Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen, Department of 
Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, Groningen, the Netherlands; Department of 
Cognitive Neuroscience, Radboud University Medical Center, Donders Institute for 
Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, Nijmegen, the Netherlands; Center for Cognitive 
Neuroimaging, Radboud University, Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and 
Behaviour, Nijmegen, the Netherlands.
(3)Department of Cognitive Neuroscience, Radboud University Medical Center, 
Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, Nijmegen, the Netherlands; 
Center for Cognitive Neuroimaging, Radboud University, Donders Institute for 
Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, Nijmegen, the Netherlands.
(4)Department of Cognitive Neuroscience, Radboud University Medical Center, 
Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, Nijmegen, the Netherlands; 
Center for Cognitive Neuroimaging, Radboud University, Donders Institute for 
Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, Nijmegen, the Netherlands; Karakter Child and 
Adolescent Psychiatry, University Center, Nijmegen, the Netherlands.
(5)University of Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen, Department of 
Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, Groningen, the Netherlands.

Findings of executive functioning deficits in Tourette syndrome (TS) have so far 
been inconsistent, possibly due to methodological challenges of previous 
studies, such as the use of small sample sizes and not accounting for comorbid 
attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), obsessive-compulsive disorder 
(OCD), or medication use. We aimed to address these issues by examining several 
areas of executive functioning (response inhibition, attentional flexibility, 
cognitive control, and working memory) and psychomotor speed in 174 
8-to-12-year-old children with TS [n = 34 without (TS-ADHD) and n = 26 with 
comorbid ADHD (TS+ADHD)], ADHD without tics (ADHD-TS; n = 54), and healthy 
controls (n = 60). We compared executive functioning measures and psychomotor 
speed between these groups and related these to ADHD severity across the whole 
sample, and tic severity across the TS groups. Children with TS+ADHD, but not 
TS-ADHD, made more errors on the cognitive control task than healthy children, 
while TS-ADHD had a slower psychomotor speed compared to healthy controls. The 
ADHD group showed impairment in cognitive control and working memory versus 
healthy controls. Moreover, higher ADHD severity was associated with poorer 
cognitive control and working memory across all groups; there was no relation 
between any of the executive functioning measures and tic severity. OCD severity 
or medication use did not influence our results. In conclusion, we found little 
evidence for executive function impairments inherent to TS. Executive function 
problems appear to manifest predominantly in relation to ADHD symptomatology, 
with both cross-disorder and unique features of neuropsychological functioning 
when cross-comparing TS and ADHD.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cortex.2019.11.007
PMID: 31901563 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest Jan K. 
Buitelaar has been a consultant to/member of advisory board of/and/or speaker 
for Janssen Cilag BV, Eli Lilly, Lundbeck, Shire, Roche, Medice, Novartis, and 
Servier. He has received research support from Roche and Vifor. He is not an 
employee or a stock shareholder of any of these companies. He has no other 
financial or material support, including expert testimony, patents, and 
royalties. The other authors have no conflict of interest to report.


614. Cortex. 2013 Mar;49(3):850-60. doi: 10.1016/j.cortex.2012.04.016. Epub 2012 May 
16.

Direct current stimulation (tDCS) reveals parietal asymmetry in local/global and 
salience-based selection.

Bardi L(1), Kanai R, Mapelli D, Walsh V.

Author information:
(1)Department of General Psychology, University of Padova, Italy. 
lara.bardi@unipd.it

Data from neuropsychology and neuroimaging studies indicate hemispheric 
asymmetries in processing object's global form versus local parts. However the 
attentional mechanisms subtending visual selection of different levels of 
information are poorly understood. The classical left hemisphere/local-right 
hemisphere/global dichotomy has been recently challenged by studies linking the 
asymmetry of activation in the posterior parietal cortex (PPC) with the relative 
salience of the stimulus rather than with the local/global level. The present 
study aimed to assess hemispheric asymmetry in local-global and salience-based 
selection in hierarchical stimuli by using transcranial direct current 
stimulation (tDCS). To this end, tDCS has been applied to the PPC of both the 
hemispheres. Our data revealed that tDCS did affect the selection of the target 
on the basis of its relative salience in a manner that depended on the tDCS 
polarity applied to the two hemispheres. This result is in line with previous 
findings that the left PPC is critically involved in attention for low-salience 
stimuli in the presence of high-salience distractor information, while right PPC 
is involved in attending to more salient stimuli. Hemispheric asymmetries were 
also found in local/global selection. Overall the results suggest that neural 
activation in the PPC is related to both the salience and the level of stimulus 
representations mediating responses to hierarchical stimuli. The comparison of 
the results from Experiments 1 and 2 in local/global-based selection suggests 
that the effect of stimulation could be completely opposite depending on subtle 
differences in demands of attentional control (sustained attention vs task 
switching).

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cortex.2012.04.016
PMID: 22699023 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


615. Parkinsonism Relat Disord. 2025 Jun;135:107832. doi: 
10.1016/j.parkreldis.2025.107832. Epub 2025 Apr 16.

Phenotyping the demographic and behavioral correlates of start hesitation in 
Parkinson's disease.

Coppin C(1), Bruzze L(1), Burke PGR(2), Lewis SJG(3).

Author information:
(1)Parkinson's Disease Research Clinic, 75 Talavera Road, Macquarie University, 
NSW, Australia.
(2)Macquarie Medical School, 75 Talavera Road, Macquarie University, NSW, 
Australia.
(3)Parkinson's Disease Research Clinic, 75 Talavera Road, Macquarie University, 
NSW, Australia. Electronic address: simon.lewis@mq.edu.au.

INTRODUCTION: Freezing of gait (FOG) is a significant symptom in Parkinson's 
Disease (PD) that has been associated with attentional set shifting deficits, 
suggesting an underlying frontostriatal neurobiology. Whilst to date Start 
Hesitation (SH) has been regarded as a subtype of FOG, whether it shares the 
same underlying neural correlates remains unknown. The specific correlation of 
SH with other clinical features might help to elucidate its neurobiological 
underpinnings, which could potentially offer novel treatment strategies.
METHODS: In this study, 72 PD patients underwent a previously validated VR gait 
paradigm in either On, Off or both medication states to identify episodes of SH. 
Participants also underwent a standardized clinical battery covering motor and 
non-motor features, including neuropsychometric testing across domains of 
attention, language, working memory, and visuospatial function.
RESULTS: The presence of SH was identified in 48 of the 72 patients. Compared to 
patients without SH, those demonstrating SH had a significantly higher 
depression score (3.8 vs 2.2, p = 0.045) and reported more REM Sleep Behavior 
Disorder (5.8 vs 3.3, p = 0.005). Notably, there were no significant group 
differences in age, disease duration, MDS-UPDRS scores, motor phenotype, falls 
risk, or any cognitive domains. In those patients with SH, there were no 
correlations of large magnitude between the duration of SH episodes and any 
relevant clinical, demographic or neuropsychometric measures.
CONCLUSION: These results suggest that the neurobiological underpinnings of SH 
are distinct from those reported across FOG and may relate more to brainstem 
pathology. Further neuroimaging and neurophysiological approaches are now 
required.

Copyright © 2025 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.parkreldis.2025.107832
PMID: 40267586 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.


616. Psychiatry Res. 2004 Dec 15;129(2):179-90. doi: 10.1016/j.psychres.2004.06.016.

Do schizophrenia patients make more perseverative than non-perseverative errors 
on the Wisconsin Card Sorting Test? A meta-analytic study.

Li CS(1).

Author information:
(1)Connecticut Mental Health Center, Department of Psychiatry, Yale University, 
Rm. S103, 34 Park Street, New Haven, CT 06519, USA. chiang-shan.li@yale.edu

The Wisconsin Card Sorting Test (WCST) is widely used to explore executive 
functions in patients with schizophrenia. Among other findings, a higher number 
of perseverative errors has been suggested to implicate a deficit in task 
switching and inhibitory functions in schizophrenia. Many studies of patients 
with schizophrenia have focused on perseverative errors as the primary 
performance index in the WCST. However, do schizophrenia patients 
characteristically make more perseverative than non-perseverative errors 
compared with healthy controls? We reviewed the literature where schizophrenia 
patients were engaged in the WCST irrespective of the primary goal of the study. 
The results showed that while both schizophrenia patients and healthy 
participants made more perseverative than non-perseverative errors, the contrast 
between perseverative and non-perseverative errors is higher in schizophrenia 
patients only at a marginal level of significance. This result suggests that 
schizophrenia patients do make a comparable number of non-perseverative errors 
and cautions against simplistic interpretation of poor performance of 
schizophrenia patients in WCST as entirely resulting from impairment in 
set-shifting or inhibitory functions.

DOI: 10.1016/j.psychres.2004.06.016
PMID: 15590045 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


617. Transl Psychiatry. 2015 May 19;5(5):e567. doi: 10.1038/tp.2015.61.

Neurocognitive dysfunction and pharmacological intervention using guanfacine in 
a rhesus macaque model of self-injurious behavior.

Freeman ZT(1), Rice KA(2), Soto PL(3), Pate KA(1), Weed MR(3), Ator NA(3), 
DeLeon IG(4), Wong DF(5), Zhou Y(6), Mankowski JL(1), Zink MC(1), Adams RJ(1), 
Hutchinson EK(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Comparative Pathobiology, Johns Hopkins 
University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA.
(2)1] Department of Molecular and Comparative Pathobiology, Johns Hopkins 
University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA [2] Division of Veterinary 
Resources, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA.
(3)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Johns Hopkins University 
School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA.
(4)1] Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Johns Hopkins University 
School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA [2] Department of Behavioral Psychology, 
Kennedy Krieger Institute, Baltimore, MD, USA.
(5)1] Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Johns Hopkins University 
School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA [2] Department of Radiology and 
Radiological Science, Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA [3] 
Department of Neuroscience, Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, 
USA.
(6)Department of Radiology and Radiological Science, Johns Hopkins School of 
Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA.
(7)Division of Veterinary Resources, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, 
MD, USA.

Self-injurious behavior (SIB) is a common comorbidity of psychiatric disorders 
but there is a dearth of information about neurological mechanisms underlying 
the behavior, and few animal models exist. SIB in humans is characterized by any 
intentional self-directed behavior that leads to wounds, whereas in macaques it 
is not always accompanied by wounds. We describe a cohort of rhesus macaques 
displaying SIB as adults, in which changes within the central nervous system 
were associated with the SIB. In these macaques, increases in central nervous 
system striatal dopamine (DA) receptor binding (BPND) measured by positron 
emission tomography (PET) [11C]raclopride imaging correlated with severity of 
wounding (rs=0.662, P=0.014). Furthermore, utilizing standardized cognitive 
function tests, we showed that impulsivity (stop signal reaction time, SSRT) and 
deficits in attentional set shifting (intra-/extradimensional shift) were 
correlated with increased severity of SIB (rs=0.563, P=0.045 and rs=0.692, 
P=0.009, respectively). We also tested the efficacy of guanfacine, an α2A 
adrenergic agonist that acts to improve postsynaptic transmission of neuronal 
impulses, in reducing SIB. A subset of these animals were enrolled in a 
randomized experimenter-blinded study that demonstrated guanfacine decreased the 
severity of wounding in treated animals compared with vehicle-only-treated 
controls (P=0.043), with residual beneficial effects seen for several weeks 
after cessation of therapy. Animals with the highest severity of SIB that 
received guanfacine also showed the most significant improvement (rs=-0.761, 
P=0.009). The elevated PET BPND was likely due to low intrasynaptic DA, which in 
turn may have been improved by guanfacine. With underlying physiology 
potentially representative of the human condition and the ability to affect 
outcome measures of disease using pharmacotherapy, this model represents a 
unique opportunity to further our understanding of the biology and treatment of 
SIB in both animals and humans.

DOI: 10.1038/tp.2015.61
PMCID: PMC4471292
PMID: 25989141 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


618. Sci Rep. 2023 Oct 6;13(1):16890. doi: 10.1038/s41598-023-43631-8.

Automation at the service of the study of executive functions in preclinical 
models.

Zoratto F(#)(1), Pisa E(#)(1), Soldati C(1), Barezzi C(1), Ottomana AM(1)(2), 
Presta M(1)(3), Santangelo V(4)(5), Macrì S(6).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Behavioural Sciences and Mental Health, Istituto Superiore di 
Sanità, Rome, Italy.
(2)Neuroscience Unit, Department of Medicine, University of Parma, Parma, Italy.
(3)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology "Vittorio Erspamer", "Sapienza" 
University of Rome, Rome, Italy.
(4)Department of Philosophy, Social Sciences and Education, University of 
Perugia, Perugia, Italy.
(5)Functional Neuroimaging Laboratory, IRCCS Santa Lucia Foundation, Rome, 
Italy.
(6)Centre for Behavioural Sciences and Mental Health, Istituto Superiore di 
Sanità, Rome, Italy. simone.macri@iss.it.
(#)Contributed equally

Cognitive flexibility involves the capability to switch between different 
perspectives and implement novel strategies upon changed circumstances. The 
Wisconsin Card Sorting Test (in humans) and the Attentional Set-Shifting Task 
(ASST, in rodents) evaluate individual capability to acquire a reward-associated 
rule and subsequently disregard it in favour of a new one. Both tasks entail 
consecutive stages wherein subjects discriminate between: two stimuli of a given 
category (simple discrimination, SD); the stimuli of SD confounded by an 
irrelevant stimulus of a different category (compound discrimination, CD); 
different stimuli belonging to the SD category (intradimensional shift, IDS); 
and two stimuli of the confounding category (extradimensional shift, EDS). The 
ASST is labour intensive, not sufficiently standardised, and prone to 
experimental error. Here, we tested the validity of a new, commercially 
available, automated version of ASST (OPERON) in two independent experiments 
conducted in: different mouse strains (C57BL/6 and CD1 mice) to confirm their 
differential cognitive capabilities (Experiment 1); and an experimental model of 
chronic stress (administration of corticosterone in the drinking water; 
Experiment 2). In both experiments, OPERON confirmed the findings obtained 
through the manual version. Just as in Experiment 1 both versions captured the 
deficit of C57BL/6 mice on the reversal of the CD (CDR), so also in Experiment 2 
they provided analogous evidence that corticosterone treated mice have a 
remarkable impairment in the IDS. Thus, OPERON capitalises upon automated 
phenotyping to overcome the limitation of the manual version of the ASST while 
providing comparable results.

© 2023. Springer Nature Limited.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-023-43631-8
PMCID: PMC10558442
PMID: 37803045 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.


619. Brain Cogn. 2009 Feb;69(1):47-55. doi: 10.1016/j.bandc.2008.05.004. Epub 2008 
Jun 20.

The costs of crossing paths and switching tasks between audition and vision.

Murray MM(1), De Santis L, Thut G, Wylie GR.

Author information:
(1)The Functional Electrical Neuroimaging Laboratory, Neuropsychology and 
Neurorehabilitation Service, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Vaudois and 
University of Lausanne, 1011 Lausanne, Switzerland. micah.murray@chuv.ch

Switching from one functional or cognitive operation to another is thought to 
rely on executive/control processes. The efficacy of these processes may depend 
on the extent of overlap between neural circuitry mediating the different tasks; 
more effective task preparation (and by extension smaller switch costs) is 
achieved when this overlap is small. We investigated the performance costs 
associated with switching tasks and/or switching sensory modalities. 
Participants discriminated either the identity or spatial location of objects 
that were presented either visually or acoustically. Switch costs between tasks 
were significantly smaller when the sensory modality of the task switched versus 
when it repeated. This was the case irrespective of whether the pre-trial cue 
informed participants only of the upcoming task, but not sensory modality 
(Experiment 1) or whether the pre-trial cue was informative about both the 
upcoming task and sensory modality (Experiment 2). In addition, in both 
experiments switch costs between the senses were positively correlated when the 
sensory modality of the task repeated across trials and not when it switched. 
The collective evidence supports the independence of control processes mediating 
task switching and modality switching and also the hypothesis that switch costs 
reflect competitive interference between neural circuits.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bandc.2008.05.004
PMID: 18571299 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


620. Front Epidemiol. 2023;3:1168847. doi: 10.3389/fepid.2023.1168847. Epub 2023 May 
26.

Resting heart rate (variability) and cognition relationships reveal cognitively 
healthy individuals with pathological amyloid/tau ratio.

Molloy C(1), Choy EH(2), Arechavala RJ(2), Buennagel D(3), Nolty A(4), 
Spezzaferri MR(4), Sin C(4), Rising S(4), Yu J(5), Al-Ezzi A(1), Kleinman MT(2), 
Kloner RA(3)(6)(7), Arakaki X(1).

Author information:
(1)Cognition and Brain Integration Laboratory, Neurosciences, Huntington Medical 
Research Institutes, Pasadena, CA, United States.
(2)Department of Environmental and Occupational Health, University of 
California, Irvine, Irvine, CA, United States.
(3)Clinical Neuroscience Laboratory, Neurosciences, Huntington Medical Research 
Institutes, Pasadena, CA, United States.
(4)Graduate School of Psychology & Marriage and Family Therapy, Fuller 
Theological Seminary, Pasadena, CA, United States.
(5)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, University of Southern 
California, Los Angeles, CA, United States.
(6)Cardiovascular Research, Huntington Medical Research Institutes, Pasadena, 
CA, United States.
(7)Cardiovascular Division, Department of Medicine, Keck School of Medicine at 
University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, United States.

INTRODUCTION: Resting heart rate (HR) and heart rate variability (HRV) have been 
linked with cognition in the general population and in older individuals. The 
knowledge of this aspect of heart-brain relationship is relatively absent in 
older individuals with early Alzheimer's disease (AD) pathology. This study 
explores relationships of the HR, HRV, and cognition in cognitively healthy 
individuals with pathological amyloid/tau ratio (CH-PATs) in cerebral spinal 
fluid (CSF) compared to those with normal ratio (CH-NATs).
METHODS: We examined therelationshipsbetween1) resting HR and Mini-Mental State 
Examination (MMSE); 2) resting HR and brain processing during Stroop 
interference; and 3) resting vagally mediated HRV (vmHRV) and task switching 
performance.
RESULTS: Our studies showed that compared to CH-NATs, those CH-PATs with higher 
resting HR presented with lower MMSE, and less brain activation during 
interference processing. In addition, resting vmHRV was significantly correlated 
with task switching accuracy in CH-NATs, but not in CH-PATs.
DISCUSSION: Thesethreedifferenttestsindicatedysfunctionalheart-brainconnections 
in CH-PATs, suggesting a potential cardio-cerebral dysfunctional integration.

DOI: 10.3389/fepid.2023.1168847
PMCID: PMC10428767
PMID: 37587981

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest The authors declare that 
the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial 
relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.


621. Front Hum Neurosci. 2012 May 7;6:121. doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2012.00121. eCollection 
2012.

The role of consciousness in cognitive control and decision making.

van Gaal S(1), de Lange FP, Cohen MX.

Author information:
(1)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale, Cognitive 
Neuroimaging Unit Gif-sur-Yvette, France.

Here we review studies on the complexity and strength of unconscious information 
processing. We focus on empirical evidence that relates awareness of information 
to cognitive control processes (e.g., response inhibition, conflict resolution, 
and task-switching), the life-time of information maintenance (e.g., working 
memory) and the possibility to integrate multiple pieces of information across 
space and time. Overall, the results that we review paint a picture of local and 
specific effects of unconscious information on various (high-level) brain 
regions, including areas in the prefrontal cortex. Although this neural 
activation does not elicit any conscious experience, it is functional and 
capable of influencing many perceptual, cognitive (control) and decision-related 
processes, sometimes even for relatively long periods of time. However, recent 
evidence also points out interesting dissociations between conscious and 
unconscious information processing when it comes to the duration, flexibility 
and the strategic use of that information for complex operations and 
decision-making. Based on the available evidence, we conclude that the role of 
task-relevance of subliminal information and meta-cognitive factors in 
unconscious cognition need more attention in future work.

DOI: 10.3389/fnhum.2012.00121
PMCID: PMC3345871
PMID: 22586386


622. Psychophysiology. 2011 Apr;48(4):559-68. doi: 10.1111/j.1469-8986.2010.01115.x. 
Epub 2010 Aug 16.

Switch-specific and general preparation map onto different ERP components in a 
task-switching paradigm.

Karayanidis F(1), Provost A, Brown S, Paton B, Heathcote A.

Author information:
(1)Functional Neuroimaging Laboratory, School of Psychology and Centre for Brain 
and Mental Health Research, University of Newcastle, Callaghan, Australia. 
frini.karayanidis@newcastle.edu.au

We examined whether the cue-locked centroparietal positivity is associated with 
switch-specific or general preparation processes. If this positivity (300-400 
ms) indexes switch-specific preparation, faster switch trials associated with 
smaller RT switch cost should have a larger positivity as compared to slower 
switch trials, but no such association should be evident for repeat trials. We 
extracted ERP waveforms corresponding to semi-deciles of each participant's RT 
distribution (i.e., fastest to slowest 5% of trials) for switch and repeat 
conditions. Consistent with a switch-specific preparation process, 
centroparietal positivity amplitude was linked to slower RT and larger RT switch 
cost for switch but not repeat trials. A later pre-target negativity (500-600 
ms) was inversely correlated with RT for both switch and repeat trials, 
consistent with a general anticipatory preparation processes.

Copyright © 2010 Society for Psychophysiological Research.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1469-8986.2010.01115.x
PMID: 20718932 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


623. Psychiatry Res. 2022 Feb;308:114351. doi: 10.1016/j.psychres.2021.114351. Epub 
2021 Dec 24.

The obsessive-compulsive spectrum: A network analysis.

Dingemans AE(1), Volkmer SA(2), Mulkens S(3), Vuijk R(4), van Rood YR(5).

Author information:
(1)Rivierduinen Eating Disorders Ursula, Leiden, The Netherlands. Electronic 
address: a.dingemans@rivierduinen.nl.
(2)Zeppelin University, Friedrichshafen, Germany.
(3)Department of Psychiatry and Neuropsychology, and Department of Clinical 
Psychological Science, Maastricht University, Maastricht, The Netherlands.
(4)Sarr Autism Rotterdam, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
(5)Department of Psychiatry, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The 
Netherlands.

Several studies have shown that obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD), eating 
disorders (ED), autism spectrum disorders (ASD) and body dysmorphic disorder 
(BDD) share obsessive-compulsive (OC) symptoms and often co-occur, which could 
be seen as indicative of a common etiological basis. In addition, they also 
appear to have similarities in executive functioning. The present study 
investigated disorder-specific symptoms and executive functioning as a possible 
joint factor in individuals with OCD (n=53), BDD (n=95), ED (n=171) and ASD 
(n=73), and in healthy controls (n=110). The participants completed online 
questionnaires measuring OCD, ED, ASD and BDD related symptoms as well as 
executive functioning. The clinical groups were first compared to the healthy 
controls. Subsequently, a network analysis was performed only with the 
OC-groups. This network approach assumes that psychopathological disorders are 
the result of causal symptom interactions. As expected, the healthy controls 
reported less severe symptoms compared to the OC patient groups. The network 
analysis suggested that the executive functioning skill set shifting/attention 
switching and the ASD symptoms, social and communication skills were the most 
central nodes in the model. Difficulty with cognitive flexibility and social 
factors are central in OC-spectrum disorders and may be perpetuating factors and 
thus a relevant focus of treatment.

Copyright © 2021. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.psychres.2021.114351
PMID: 34979379 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


624. Continuum (Minneap Minn). 2021 Dec 1;27(6):1586-1601. doi: 
10.1212/CON.0000000000001009.

Executive Dysfunction and the Prefrontal Cortex.

Jones DT, Graff-Radford J.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: This article summarizes the cognitive and behavioral 
functions of the prefrontal cortex with an emphasis on executive cognitive 
functions and the clinical consequences associated with executive dysfunction. 
The clinical manifestations of lesions to the lateral prefrontal, orbitofrontal, 
medial prefrontal, and frontopolar cortex are reviewed.
RECENT FINDINGS: Traditional lesion studies have emphasized the role of a brain 
region in controlling a cognitive function. With advances in neurology, 
neuropsychology, and neuroimaging, the participation of the prefrontal cortex in 
large-scale networks has been established with recognition that cognitive 
dysfunction can arise not only from a lesion within a network but also from 
degenerative disease targeting these large-scale, dynamic neural networks. 
Although executive dysfunction can result from frontal lobe injury, this article 
highlights the role of distributed processes subserving executive functions. An 
atypical phenotype of Alzheimer disease has been described that selectively 
targets parietal-temporal-frontal networks important for core executive 
functions.
SUMMARY: Executive function comprises working memory, cognitive flexibility, and 
inhibition and depends on top-down (ie, goal-driven) control of distributed 
processes occurring throughout the brain. The exact behavioral output (ie, 
function) depends on the content of the processes being controlled. Prefrontal 
cortex regions serve key cognitive functions related to social, emotional, and 
motivational aspects of behavior. The dorsal lateral prefrontal cortex plays a 
role in working memory, goal-driven attention, task switching, planning, 
problem-solving, and novelty-seeking. The ventral lateral prefrontal cortex 
plays a role in inhibition, response selection, and monitoring; the medial 
prefrontal cortex in self-knowledge, motivation, emotional regulation, and 
updating goal-directed behavior; the orbitofrontal cortex in personality, 
inhibition, and emotional and social reasoning. Although dysexecutive syndromes 
have been traditionally associated with dorsolateral prefrontal cortex injury, 
it is now recognized that they can also result from an impaired 
parietal-temporal-frontal system, which is targeted in a distinct form of 
atypical Alzheimer disease. This dysexecutive Alzheimer phenotype is 
characterized by impaired task performance on a wide battery of 
neuropsychological tests and simple daily tasks that require executive control. 
In contrast, dysexecutive syndromes more localized to the frontal lobe involve 
impaired executive control of social, emotional, and motivational aspects of 
behavior.

Copyright © 2021 American Academy of Neurology.

DOI: 10.1212/CON.0000000000001009
PMID: 34881727 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


625. Neuropsychologia. 2016 Oct;91:444-450. doi: 
10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2016.09.008. Epub 2016 Sep 13.

Impaired motor inhibition in adults who stutter - evidence from speech-free 
stop-signal reaction time tasks.

Markett S(1), Bleek B(2), Reuter M(1), Prüss H(3), Richardt K(3), Müller T(3), 
Yaruss JS(4), Montag C(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Bonn, Germany; Center for Economics 
and Neuroscience, University of Bonn, Germany.
(2)Department of Psychology, University of Bonn, Germany.
(3)Neurology (Stuttering Therapy), LVR Clinics Bonn, Germany.
(4)Department of Communication Science & Disorders, University of Pittsburgh, 
PA, USA.
(5)Department of Psychology, University of Ulm, Germany; Key Laboratory for 
Neuroinformation/Center for Information in Medicine, University of Electronic 
Science and Technology, Chengdu, China.

Idiopathic stuttering is a fluency disorder characterized by impairments during 
speech production. Deficits in the motor control circuits of the basal ganglia 
have been implicated in idiopathic stuttering but it is unclear how these 
impairments relate to the disorder. Previous work has indicated a possible 
deficiency in motor inhibition in children who stutter. To extend these findings 
to adults, we designed two experiments to probe executive motor control in 
people who stutter using manual reaction time tasks that do not rely on speech 
production. We used two versions of the stop-signal reaction time task, a 
measure for inhibitory motor control that has been shown to rely on the basal 
ganglia circuits. We show increased stop-signal reaction times in two 
independent samples of adults who stutter compared to age- and sex-matched 
control groups. Additional measures involved simple reaction time measurements 
and a task-switching task where no group difference was detected. Results 
indicate a deficiency in inhibitory motor control in people who stutter in a 
task that does not rely on overt speech production and cannot be explained by 
general deficits in executive control or speeded motor execution. This finding 
establishes the stop-signal reaction time as a possible target for future 
experimental and neuroimaging studies on fluency disorders and is a further step 
towards unraveling the contribution of motor control deficits to idiopathic 
stuttering.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2016.09.008
PMID: 27619005 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


626. Front Psychiatry. 2022 Nov 21;13:1069036. doi: 10.3389/fpsyt.2022.1069036. 
eCollection 2022.

Investigating cognitive flexibility deficit in schizophrenia using task-based 
whole-brain functional connectivity.

Wang Y(1)(2), Hu X(3)(4), Li Y(5).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Psychology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.
(2)Department of Psychology, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 
China.
(3)School of Linguistic Science and Art, Jiangsu Normal University, Xuzhou, 
China.
(4)Key Laboratory of Language and Cognitive Neuroscience of Jiangsu Province, 
Collaborative Innovation Center for Language Ability, Xuzhou, China.
(5)The Clinical Hospital of Chengdu Brain Science Institute, MOE Key Laboratory 
for Neuroinformation, Center for Information in Medicine, School of Life Science 
and Technology, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, 
Chengdu, China.

BACKGROUND: Cognitive flexibility is a core cognitive control function supported 
by the brain networks of the whole-brain. Schizophrenic patients show deficits 
in cognitive flexibility in conditions such as task-switching. A large number of 
neuroimaging studies have revealed abnormalities in local brain activations 
associated with deficits in cognitive flexibility in schizophrenia, but the 
relationship between impaired cognitive flexibility and the whole-brain 
functional connectivity (FC) pattern is unclear.
METHOD: We investigated the task-based functional connectivity of the 
whole-brain in patients with schizophrenia and healthy controls during 
task-switching. Multivariate pattern analysis (MVPA) was utilized to investigate 
whether the FC pattern can be used as a feature to discriminate schizophrenia 
patients from healthy controls. Graph theory analysis was further used to 
quantify the degrees of integration and segregation in the whole-brain networks 
to interpret the different reconfiguration patterns of brain networks in 
schizophrenia patients and healthy controls.
RESULTS: The results showed that the FC pattern classified schizophrenia 
patients and healthy controls with significant accuracy. Moreover, the altered 
whole-brain functional connectivity pattern was driven by a lower degree of 
network integration and segregation in schizophrenia, indicating that both 
global and local information transfers at the entire-network level were less 
efficient in schizophrenia patients than in healthy controls during 
task-switching processing.
CONCLUSION: These results investigated the group differences in FC profiles 
during task-switching and not only elucidated that FC patterns are changed in 
schizophrenic patients, suggesting that task-based FC could be used as a 
potential neuromarker to discriminate schizophrenia patients from healthy 
controls in cognitive flexibility but also provide increased insight into the 
brain network organization that may contribute to impaired cognitive 
flexibility.

Copyright © 2022 Wang, Hu and Li.

DOI: 10.3389/fpsyt.2022.1069036
PMCID: PMC9719952
PMID: 36479558

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.


627. Horm Behav. 2016 May;81:12-9. doi: 10.1016/j.yhbeh.2016.02.002. Epub 2016 Mar 2.

Effects of basal and acute cortisol on cognitive flexibility in an emotional 
task switching paradigm in men.

Dierolf AM(1), Arlt LE(2), Roelofs K(3), Kölsch M(4), Hülsemann MJ(5), 
Schächinger H(6), Naumann E(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Trier, Universitätsring 15, 54286 
Trier, Germany. Electronic address: Angelika.Dierolf@ruhr-uni-bochum.de.
(2)Department of Psychology, University of Trier, Universitätsring 15, 54286 
Trier, Germany. Electronic address: s1learlt@uni-trier.de.
(3)Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, Centre for Cognitive 
Neuroimaging, Postbus 9104, 65000 HE Nijmegen, Netherlands. Electronic address: 
k.roelofs@fcdonders.ru.nl.
(4)Division of Clinical Psychophysiology, Institute of Psychobiology, University 
of Trier , Johanniterufer 15, 54290 Trier, Germany. Electronic address: 
MonikaKoelsch@web.de.
(5)Department of Psychology, University of Trier, Universitätsring 15, 54286 
Trier, Germany. Electronic address: s1mahuel@uni-trier.de.
(6)Division of Clinical Psychophysiology, Institute of Psychobiology, University 
of Trier , Johanniterufer 15, 54290 Trier, Germany. Electronic address: 
schaechi@uni-trier.de.
(7)Department of Psychology, University of Trier, Universitätsring 15, 54286 
Trier, Germany. Electronic address: naumann@uni-trier.de.

The stress hormone cortisol is assumed to influence cognitive functions. While 
cortisol-induced alterations of declarative memory in particular are 
well-investigated, considerably less is known about its influence on executive 
functions. Moreover, most research has been focused on slow effects, and rapid 
non-genomic effects have not been studied. The present study sought to 
investigate the impact of acute cortisol administration as well as basal 
cortisol levels on cognitive flexibility, a core executive function, within the 
non-genomic time frame. Thirty-eight healthy male participants were randomly 
assigned to intravenously receive either cortisol or a placebo before performing 
a task switching paradigm with happy and angry faces as stimuli. Cortisol levels 
were measured at six points during the experiment. Additionally, before the 
experiment, basal cortisol measures for the cortisol awakening response were 
collected on three consecutive weekdays immediately following awakening and 30, 
45, and 60min after. First and foremost, results showed a pronounced impact of 
acute and basal cortisol on reaction time switch costs, particularly for angry 
faces. In the placebo group, low basal cortisol was associated with minimal 
switch costs, whereas high basal cortisol was related to maximal switch costs. 
In contrast, after cortisol injection, basal cortisol levels showed no impact. 
These results show that cognitive flexibility-enhancing effects of acute 
cortisol administration are only seen in men with high basal cortisol levels. 
This result supports the context dependency of cortisol administration and shows 
the relevance of taking basal cortisol levels into account.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.yhbeh.2016.02.002
PMID: 26944609 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


628. Neurobiol Aging. 2021 Aug;104:57-70. doi: 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2021.03.002. 
Epub 2021 Mar 10.

Cognitive network hyperactivation and motor cortex decline correlate with ALS 
prognosis.

McMackin R(1), Dukic S(1), Costello E(1), Pinto-Grau M(2), McManus L(1), 
Broderick M(3), Chipika R(4), Iyer PM(5), Heverin M(1), Bede P(4), Muthuraman 
M(6), Pender N(7), Hardiman O(8), Nasseroleslami B(1).

Author information:
(1)Academic Unit of Neurology, Trinity College Dublin, the University of Dublin, 
Dublin 2, Ireland.
(2)Academic Unit of Neurology, Trinity College Dublin, the University of Dublin, 
Dublin 2, Ireland; Department of Neurology, University Medical Centre Utrecht 
Brain Centre, Utrecht University, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(3)Academic Unit of Neurology, Trinity College Dublin, the University of Dublin, 
Dublin 2, Ireland; Trinity Centre for Bioengineering, Trinity College Dublin, 
the University of Dublin, Dublin 2, Ireland.
(4)Academic Unit of Neurology, Trinity College Dublin, the University of Dublin, 
Dublin 2, Ireland; Computational Neuroimaging Group, Trinity College Dublin, the 
University of Dublin, Dublin 2, Ireland.
(5)Academic Unit of Neurology, Trinity College Dublin, the University of Dublin, 
Dublin 2, Ireland; Beaumont Hospital Dublin, Department of Neurology, Dublin 9, 
Ireland.
(6)Biomedical Statistics and Multimodal Signal Processing Unit, Department of 
Neurology, Johannes-Gutenberg-University Hospital, Mainz, Germany.
(7)Academic Unit of Neurology, Trinity College Dublin, the University of Dublin, 
Dublin 2, Ireland; Department of Neurology, University Medical Centre Utrecht 
Brain Centre, Utrecht University, Utrecht, The Netherlands; Beaumont Hospital 
Dublin, Department of Neurology, Dublin 9, Ireland.
(8)Academic Unit of Neurology, Trinity College Dublin, the University of Dublin, 
Dublin 2, Ireland; Beaumont Hospital Dublin, Department of Neurology, Dublin 9, 
Ireland. Electronic address: hardimao@tcd.ie.

We aimed to quantitatively characterize progressive brain network disruption in 
Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (ALS) during cognition using the mismatch 
negativity (MMN), an electrophysiological index of attention switching. We 
measured the MMN using 128-channel EEG longitudinally (2-5 timepoints) in 60 ALS 
patients and cross-sectionally in 62 healthy controls. Using dipole fitting and 
linearly constrained minimum variance beamforming we investigated cortical 
source activity changes over time. In ALS, the inferior frontal gyri (IFG) show 
significantly lower baseline activity compared to controls. The right IFG and 
both superior temporal gyri (STG) become progressively hyperactive 
longitudinally. By contrast, the left motor and dorsolateral prefrontal cortices 
are initially hyperactive, declining progressively. Baseline motor hyperactivity 
correlates with cognitive disinhibition, and lower baseline IFG activities 
correlate with motor decline rate, while left dorsolateral prefrontal activity 
predicted cognitive and behavioural impairment. Shorter survival correlates with 
reduced baseline IFG and STG activity and later STG hyperactivation. 
Source-resolved EEG facilitates quantitative characterization of 
symptom-associated and symptom-preceding motor and cognitive-behavioral cortical 
network decline in ALS.

Copyright © 2021 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2021.03.002
PMID: 33964609 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


629. Psychiatry Res. 2017 Nov;257:111-117. doi: 10.1016/j.psychres.2017.07.035. Epub 
2017 Jul 17.

Childhood trauma is not a confounder of the overlap between autistic and 
schizotypal traits: A study in a non-clinical adult sample.

Gong JB(1), Wang Y(2), Lui SSY(3), Cheung EFC(4), Chan RCK(5).

Author information:
(1)Neuropsychology and Applied Cognitive Neuroscience Laboratory, CAS Key 
Laboratory of Mental Health, Institute of Psychology, Beijing, China; Department 
of Applied Psychology, Hunan University of Chinese Medicine, Changsha, China.
(2)Neuropsychology and Applied Cognitive Neuroscience Laboratory, CAS Key 
Laboratory of Mental Health, Institute of Psychology, Beijing, China.
(3)Neuropsychology and Applied Cognitive Neuroscience Laboratory, CAS Key 
Laboratory of Mental Health, Institute of Psychology, Beijing, China; Castle 
Peak Hospital, Hong Kong Special Administrative Region, China.
(4)Castle Peak Hospital, Hong Kong Special Administrative Region, China.
(5)Neuropsychology and Applied Cognitive Neuroscience Laboratory, CAS Key 
Laboratory of Mental Health, Institute of Psychology, Beijing, China; Department 
of Psychology, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China. 
Electronic address: rckchan@psych.ac.cn.

Childhood trauma has been shown to be a robust risk factor for mental disorders, 
and may exacerbate schizotypal traits or contribute to autistic trait severity. 
However, little is known whether childhood trauma confounds the overlap between 
schizotypal traits and autistic traits. This study examined whether childhood 
trauma acts as a confounding variable in the overlap between autistic and 
schizotypal traits in a large non-clinical adult sample. A total of 2469 
participants completed the Autism Spectrum Quotient (AQ), the Schizotypal 
Personality Questionnaire (SPQ), and the Childhood Trauma Questionnaire-Short 
Form. Correlation analysis showed that the majority of associations between AQ 
variables and SPQ variables were significant (p < 0.05). In the multiple 
regression models predicting scores on the AQ total, scores on the three SPQ 
subscales were significant predictors(Ps < 0.05). Scores on the Positive 
schizotypy and Negative schizotypy subscales were significant predictors in the 
multiple regression model predicting scores on the AQ Social Skill, AQ Attention 
Switching, AQ Attention to Detail, AQ Communication, and AQ Imagination 
subscales. The association between autistic and schizotypal traits could not be 
explained by shared variance in terms of exposure to childhood trauma. The 
findings point to important overlaps in the conceptualization of ASD and SSD, 
independent of childhood trauma.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.psychres.2017.07.035
PMID: 28750214 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


630. J Exp Psychol Gen. 2018 Dec;147(12):1763-1781. doi: 10.1037/xge0000523.

Catecholaminergic modulation of the avoidance of cognitive control.

Froböse MI(1), Swart JC(1), Cook JL(1), Geurts DEM(1), den Ouden HEM(1), Cools 
R(1).

Author information:
(1)Donders Centre for Cognitive Neuroimaging, Donders Institute for Brain, 
Cognition and Behaviour, Radboud University.

The catecholamines have long been associated with cognitive control and 
value-based decision-making. More recently, we proposed that the catecholamines 
might modulate value-based decision-making about whether or not to engage in 
cognitive control. We test this hypothesis by assessing effects of a 
catecholamine challenge in a large sample of young, healthy adults (n = 100) on 
the avoidance of a cognitively demanding control process: task switching. 
Prolonging catecholamine transmission by blocking reuptake with methylphenidate 
altered the avoidance, but not the execution of cognitive control. Crucially, 
these effects could be isolated by taking into account individual differences in 
trait impulsivity, so that participants with higher trait impulsivity became 
more avoidant of cognitive control, despite faster task performance. One 
implication of these findings is that performance-enhancing effects of 
methylphenidate may be accompanied by an undermining effect on the willingness 
to exert cognitive control. Taken together, these findings integrate hitherto 
segregated literatures on catecholamines' roles in value-based learning/choice 
and cognitive control. (PsycINFO Database Record (c) 2018 APA, all rights 
reserved).

DOI: 10.1037/xge0000523
PMID: 30507233 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


631. Brain Res. 2006 Jun 20;1095(1):107-23. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2006.04.016. Epub 
2006 May 22.

ERPs dissociate the effects of switching task sets and task cues.

Nicholson R(1), Karayanidis F, Bumak E, Poboka D, Michie PT.

Author information:
(1)Functional Neuroimaging Lab, School of Psychology, University of Newcastle, 
Callaghan, NSW 2308, Australia. rebecca.nicholson@newcastle.edu.au

Recent studies have suggested that reaction time (RT) costs associated with 
switching tasks do not reflect an endogenous control process of task set 
reconfiguration [Logan, G. D., Bundesen, C., 2003. Clever Homunculus: Is There 
an Endogenous Act of Control in the Explicit Task-Cuing Procedure? J. Exp. 
Psychol. Hum. Percept. Perform. 29 (3), 575-599]. Participants randomly switched 
between two simple tasks. Task was cued 600 ms prior to stimulus presentation 
using either a color or shape cue. A significant RT task switch cost was found 
when controlling for either a repeat or switch in cue category. In comparison, a 
switch in cue category had no effect on RT, even when examined across a 
cumulative distribution. Electrophysiological data revealed early cue processing 
effects within the first 300 ms after cue onset. However, replicating previous 
findings, an increased parietal positivity was found for task switch relative to 
task repeat trials that emerged prior to stimulus onset. This suggests that task 
set reconfiguration processes are activated when switching between tasks and 
supports the usefulness of task-switching paradigms in investigating cognitive 
control processes.

DOI: 10.1016/j.brainres.2006.04.016
PMID: 16714004 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


632. Behav Pharmacol. 2015 Feb;26(1-2):227-40. doi: 10.1097/FBP.0000000000000116.

Reward modulation of cognitive function in adult attention-deficit/hyperactivity 
disorder: a pilot study on the role of striatal dopamine.

Aarts E(1), van Holstein M, Hoogman M, Onnink M, Kan C, Franke B, Buitelaar J, 
Cools R.

Author information:
(1)aCentre for Cognitive Neuroimaging, Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition 
and Behaviour, Radboud University Nijmegen bDepartment of Psychiatry cDepartment 
of Human Genetics dDepartment of Cognitive Neuroscience, Centre for 
Neuroscience, Radboud University Medical Center, Donders Institute for Brain, 
Cognition and Behaviour eKarakter Child and Adolescent Psychiatry University 
Centre, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.

Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) is accompanied by impairments in 
cognitive control, such as task-switching deficits. We investigated whether such 
problems, and their remediation by medication, reflect abnormal reward 
motivation and associated striatal dopamine transmission in ADHD. We used 
functional genetic neuroimaging to assess the effects of dopaminergic medication 
and reward motivation on task-switching and striatal BOLD signal in 23 adults 
with ADHD, ON and OFF methylphenidate, and 26 healthy controls. Critically, we 
took into account interindividual variability in striatal dopamine by exploiting 
a common genetic polymorphism (3'-UTR VNTR) in the DAT1 gene coding for the 
dopamine transporter. The results showed a highly significant group by genotype 
interaction in the striatum. This was because a subgroup of patients with ADHD 
showed markedly exaggerated effects of reward on the striatal BOLD signal during 
task-switching when they were OFF their dopaminergic medication. Specifically, 
patients carrying the 9R allele showed a greater striatal signal than healthy 
controls carrying this allele, whereas no effect of diagnosis was observed in 
10R homozygotes. Aberrant striatal responses were normalized when 9R-carrying 
patients with ADHD were ON medication. These pilot data indicate an important 
role for aberrant reward motivation, striatal dopamine and interindividual 
genetic differences in cognitive processes in adult ADHD.

DOI: 10.1097/FBP.0000000000000116
PMCID: PMC5398319
PMID: 25485641 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


633. Psychiatry Res. 2015 Dec 15;230(2):496-505. doi: 10.1016/j.psychres.2015.09.043. 
Epub 2015 Oct 9.

Evidence against mood-congruent attentional bias in Major Depressive Disorder.

Cheng P(1), Preston SD(2), Jonides J(2), Mohr AH(2), Thummala K(2), Casement 
M(2), Hsing C(2), Deldin PJ(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Michigan, 530 Church Street, Ann 
Arbor, MI 48109, USA. Electronic address: chungfuc@umich.edu.
(2)Department of Psychology, University of Michigan, 530 Church Street, Ann 
Arbor, MI 48109, USA.

Depression is consistently associated with biased retrieval and interpretation 
of affective stimuli, but evidence for depressive bias in earlier cognitive 
processing, such as attention, is mixed. In five separate experiments, 
individuals with depression (three experiments with clinically diagnosed major 
depression, two experiments with dysphoria measured via the Beck Depression 
Inventory) completed three tasks designed to elicit depressive biases in 
attention, including selective attention, attentional switching, and attentional 
inhibition. Selective attention was measured using a modified emotional Stroop 
task, while attentional switching and inhibition was examined via an emotional 
task-switching paradigm and an emotional counter task. Results across five 
different experiments indicate that individuals with depression perform 
comparably with healthy controls, providing corroboration that depression is not 
characterized by biases in attentional processes.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.psychres.2015.09.043
PMID: 26477954 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


634. J Neurotrauma. 2021 Jan 1;38(1):74-85. doi: 10.1089/neu.2019.6922. Epub 2020 Oct 
30.

Examining the Subacute Effects of Mild Traumatic Brain Injury Using a 
Traditional and Computerized Neuropsychological Test Battery.

Karlsen RH(1), Saksvik SB(2)(3), Stenberg J(1), Lundervold AJ(4), Olsen A(2)(3), 
Rautio I(2), Folvik L(2), Håberg AK(1)(5), Vik A(1)(5), Karr JE(6), Iverson 
GL(6), Skandsen T(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuromedicine and Movement Science, Faculty of Medicine and 
Health Sciences, Faculty of Social and Educational Sciences, Norwegian 
University of Science and Technology, NTNU, Trondheim, Norway.
(2)Department of Psychology, Faculty of Social and Educational Sciences, 
Norwegian University of Science and Technology, NTNU, Trondheim, Norway.
(3)Department of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, St. Olav's Hospital, 
Trondheim University Hospital, Trondheim, Norway.
(4)Department of Biological and Medical Psychology, University of Bergen, 
Bergen, Norway.
(5)Department of Neurosurgery, St. Olav's Hospital, Trondheim University 
Hospital, Trondheim, Norway.
(6)Department of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, Harvard Medical School, 
Spaulding Rehabilitation Hospital and Spaulding Research Institute, Home Base 
Program, Red Sox Foundation and Massachusetts General Hospital, Charlestown, 
Massachusetts, USA.

This study investigates subacute cognitive effects of mild traumatic brain 
injury (MTBI) in the Trondheim Mild TBI Study, as measured, in part, by the 
neuropsychological test battery of the Collaborative European NeuroTrauma 
Effectiveness Research in TBI (CENTER-TBI) program, including computerized tests 
from the Cambridge Neuropsychological Test Automated Battery (CANTAB) and 
traditional paper-and-pencil tests. We investigated whether cognitive function 
was associated with injury severity: intracranial traumatic lesions on 
neuroimaging, witnessed loss of consciousness (LOC), or post-traumatic amnesia 
(PTA) >1 h. Further, we explored which of the tests in the CENTER-TBI battery 
might be associated with the largest subacute effects of MTBI (i.e., at 2 weeks 
post-injury). We recruited 177 patients with MTBI (16-59 years of age) from a 
regional trauma center and an outpatient clinic,79 trauma control participants, 
and 81 community control participants. The MTBI group differed from community 
controls only on one traditional test of processing speed (coding; p = 0.009, 
Cliff's delta [Δ] = 0.20). Patients with intracranial abnormalities performed 
worse than those without on a traditional test (phonemic verbal fluency; 
p = 0.043, Δ = 0.27), and patients with LOC performed differently on the 
Attention Switching Task from the CANTAB (p = 0.020, Δ = -0.20). Patients with 
PTA >1 h performed worse than those with <1 h on 10 measures, from traditional 
tests and the CANTAB (Δ = 0.33-0.20), likely attributable, at least in part, to 
pre-existing differences in intellectual functioning between groups. In general, 
those with MTBI had good neuropsychological outcome 2 weeks after injury and no 
particular CENTER-TBI computerized or traditional tests seemed to be more 
sensitive to subtle cognitive deficits.

DOI: 10.1089/neu.2019.6922
PMID: 32948095 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


635. EXCLI J. 2024 May 6;23:714-726. doi: 10.17179/excli2024-7027. eCollection 2024.

Combined non-invasive neuromodulation using transcranial direct current 
stimulation, motor imagery and action observation for motor, cognitive and 
functional recovery in cortico-basal degeneration: a single case study.

Romero JP(1)(2)(3)(4), Martínez-Benito A(1)(5), de Noreña D(3), Hurtado-Martínez 
A(1)(2), Sánchez-Cuesta FJ(1)(2), González-Zamorano Y(1)(4)(6)(7), Moreno-Verdú 
M(1)(8).

Author information:
(1)Brain Injury and Movement Disorders Neurorehabilitation Group (GINDAT), 
Francisco de Vitoria University, Pozuelo de Alarcón, 28223, Spain.
(2)Facultad de Ciencias Experimentales, Universidad Francisco de Vitoria, 
Pozuelo de Alarcón, 28223, Spain.
(3)Brain Damage Unit, Beata María Ana Hospital, Madrid, 28007, Spain.
(4)Cognitive Neuroscience, Pain and Rehabilitation Research Group (NECODOR), 
Faculty of Health Sciences, Rey Juan Carlos University, Madrid, Spain.
(5)Departamento de Fisioterapia, Centro Superior de Estudios Universitarios La 
Salle, Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, Madrid, Spain.
(6)Escuela Internacional de Doctorado, Department of Physical Therapy, 
Occupational Therapy, Rehabilitation and Physical Medicine, Universidad Rey Juan 
Carlos, 28933 Alcorcón, Spain.
(7)Department of Physical Therapy, Occupational Therapy, Rehabilitation and 
Physical Medicine, Universidad Rey Juan Carlos, 28933 Alcorcón, Spain.
(8)Brain, Action and Skill Laboratory (BAS-Lab), Institute of Neuroscience 
(Cognition and Systems Division), UC Louvain, 1200 Woluwe-Saint-Laimbert, 
Belgium.

This case report presents a comprehensive assessment and therapeutic 
intervention using non-invasive motor cortex neuromodulation for a 70-year-old 
female patient diagnosed with corticobasal degeneration (CBD). The study 
followed the CARE guidelines. The patient meets the criteria for probable CBD, 
with neuroimaging evidence of exclusively cortical impairment. The patient 
underwent a non-invasive neuromodulation protocol involving transcranial direct 
current stimulation (tDCS) and action observation plus motor imagery (AO+MI). 
The neuromodulation protocol comprised 20 sessions involving tDCS over the 
primary motor cortex and combined AO+MI. Anodal tDCS was delivered a 2 mA 
excitatory current for 20 minutes. AO+MI focused on lower limb movements, 
progressing over four weeks with video observation and gradual execution, both 
weekly and monthly. The neuromodulation techniques were delivered online (i.e. 
applied simultaneously in each session). Outcome measures were obtained at 
baseline, post-intervention and follow-up (1 month later), and included motor 
(lower limb), cognitive/neuropsychological and functional assessments. Walking 
speed improvements were not observed, but balance (Berg Balance Scale) and 
functional strength (Five Times Sit-to-Stand Test) improved post-treatment. 
Long-term enhancements in attentional set-shifting, inhibitory control, verbal 
attentional span, and working memory were found. There was neurophysiological 
evidence of diminished intracortical inhibition. Functional changes included 
worsening in Cortico Basal Ganglia Functional Scale score. Emotional well-being 
and general health (SF-36) increased immediately after treatment but were not 
sustained, while Falls Efficacy Scale International showed only long-term 
improvement. The findings suggest potential benefits of the presented 
neuromodulation protocol for CBD patients, highlighting multifaceted outcomes in 
motor, cognitive, and functional domains.

Copyright © 2024 Romero et al.

DOI: 10.17179/excli2024-7027
PMCID: PMC11180953
PMID: 38887394

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest, because the beforementioned institution did not have any role in 
the study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish or 
preparation of the manuscript.


636. Int J Clin Health Psychol. 2026 Jan-Mar;26(1):100669. doi: 
10.1016/j.ijchp.2026.100669. Epub 2026 Feb 17.

Comparative efficacy of tDCS and tACS in the context of enhancing executive 
function under acute stress: A randomized, sham-controlled study.

Guo Z(1), Yang L(2), Li Y(1), Lu H(1), Qiu R(1), Zhu X(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Military Medical Psychology, The Fourth Military Medical 
University, Xi'an 710032, China.
(2)National Translational Science Center for Molecular Medicine & Department of 
Cell Biology, The Fourth Military Medical University, Xi'an 710032, China.

BACKGROUND: Acute stress impairs executive function and prefrontal cortex (PFC) 
activity. Transcranial electrical stimulation (tES) is a promising approach to 
the task of mitigating these deficits. This study directly compared the efficacy 
of two tES techniques-transcranial direct (tDCS) and alternating current (tACS) 
stimulation-targeting the left dorsolateral PFC (DLPFC) in terms of protecting 
executive functions under stress and potential neural mechanisms.
METHODS: In a randomized, participant-blinded, sham-controlled study, 110 
healthy male undergraduates (18-25 years) received active tDCS, tACS, or sham 
stimulation before stress induction via the Trier Social Stress Test for Groups. 
Executive function was assessed using 3-back, Go/no-go, Stroop, and 
task-switching paradigms, and prefrontal hemodynamics were recorded with 
functional near-infrared spectroscopy (fNIRS).
RESULTS: Stress induction was successfully maintained throughout the testing 
period. Compared with both the tACS and sham groups, the tDCS group exhibited 
greater working memory (3-back) accuracy. Compared with the sham group, both tES 
groups exhibited enhanced response inhibition (Go/no-go). Neuroimaging revealed 
lower left DLPFC activation during the 3-back, Go/no-go, and Stroop tasks in the 
tES groups, in which context tDCS was characterized by the lowest activation 
during cognitive inhibition. During task switching, both tES groups exhibited 
elevated activation in the right pre-supplementary motor area.
CONCLUSIONS: Both tDCS and tACS enhance performance in specific executive 
domains (working memory and response inhibition) under acute stress and 
demonstrate a pattern of lower prefrontal activation, consistent with the 
concept of improved neural efficiency. Among them, tDCS offers superior 
benefits. These findings establish a foundation for efforts to optimize 
tES-based interventions to support cognitive resilience in real-world 
acute-stress settings.

© 2026 The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijchp.2026.100669
PMCID: PMC12926976
PMID: 41737358

Conflict of interest statement: None.


637. PLoS Biol. 2006 Jul;4(7):e220. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.0040220.

Dynamics of the central bottleneck: dual-task and task uncertainty.

Sigman M(1), Dehaene S.

Author information:
(1)Unité INSERM 562, Cognitive Neuroimaging, Service Hospitalier Frédéric 
Joliot, CEA/DRM/DSV, Orsay, France. sigman@df.uba.ar

Comment in
    PLoS Biol. 2006 Jul;4(7):e244. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.0040244.

Why is the human brain fundamentally limited when attempting to execute two 
tasks at the same time or in close succession? Two classical paradigms, 
psychological refractory period (PRP) and task switching, have independently 
approached this issue, making significant advances in our understanding of the 
architecture of cognition. Yet, there is an apparent contradiction between the 
conclusions derived from these two paradigms. The PRP paradigm, on the one hand, 
suggests that the simultaneous execution of two tasks is limited solely by a 
passive structural bottleneck in which the tasks are executed on a first-come, 
first-served basis. The task-switching paradigm, on the other hand, argues that 
switching back and forth between task configurations must be actively controlled 
by a central executive system (the system controlling voluntary, planned, and 
flexible action). Here we have explicitly designed an experiment mixing the 
essential ingredients of both paradigms: task uncertainty and task simultaneity. 
In addition to a central bottleneck, we obtain evidence for active processes of 
task setting (planning of the appropriate sequence of actions) and task 
disengaging (suppression of the plan set for the first task in order to proceed 
with the next one). Our results clarify the chronometric relations between these 
central components of dual-task processing, and in particular whether they 
operate serially or in parallel. On this basis, we propose a hierarchical model 
of cognitive architecture that provides a synthesis of task-switching and PRP 
paradigms.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pbio.0040220
PMCID: PMC1481521
PMID: 16787105 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


638. Cogn Affect Behav Neurosci. 2009 Jun;9(2):202-15. doi: 10.3758/CABN.9.2.202.

Anticipatory reconfiguration elicited by fully and partially informative cues 
that validly predict a switch in task.

Karayanidis F(1), Mansfield EL, Galloway KL, Smith JL, Provost A, Heathcote A.

Author information:
(1)Functional Neuroimaging Laboratory, School of Psychology, University of 
Newcastle, Callaghan, New South Wales, Australia. 
frini.karayanidis@newcastle.edu.au

Task-switching studies show no behavioral benefit of partially informative cues. 
However, ERP evidence of an early cue-locked positivity elicited by both fully 
and partially informative cues suggests that both cues trigger an anticipatory 
component of task set reconfiguration (Nicholson, Karayanidis, Davies, & Michie, 
2006). We examined this apparent discrepancy using a cued-trials task-switching 
paradigm with three tasks. The ERP finding of an early cue-locked positivity was 
replicated for both switch-to cues, which validly predicted an upcoming switch 
trial and specified the new task set, and switch-away cues, which validly 
predicted an upcoming switch trial but not the new task set. This component was 
not elicited by a noninformative cue that did not specify whether the task would 
switch or repeat. Switch-away cues resulted in more accurate but not faster 
responding than did noninformative cues. Modeling of decision processes 
confirmed a speed-accuracy trade-off between these conditions and a preparation 
benefit for both switch-to and switch-away cues. These results indicate that 
both fully and partially informative cues elicit an early anticipatory component 
of task set reconfiguration that is reflected in the early cue-locked 
positivity. We argue that the pattern of results is most consistent with a task 
set inhibition account of this early anticipatory component of task set 
reconfiguration.

DOI: 10.3758/CABN.9.2.202
PMID: 19403896 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


639. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2002 Oct 29;99(22):14595-600. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.222193299. Epub 2002 Oct 21.

Fractionating the neural substrate of cognitive control processes.

Dreher JC(1), Berman KF.

Author information:
(1)Unit on Integrative Neuroimaging, Clinical Brain Disorders Branch, National 
Institute of Mental Health, National Institutes of Health, Intramural Research 
Program, Bethesda, MD 20892-1365, USA. dreherj@intra.nimh.nih.gov

Psychological and neurobiological theories of cognitive control must account for 
flexible, seemless transitions among cognitive operations. When subjects switch 
between tasks, they must both inhibit the previous task and re-engage in a 
different task. Inhibition of the disengaged task remains active for a period of 
time and has to be overcome when re-engaging in the same task. Here we used a 
task-switching paradigm that allows distinction of two control processes: 
overcoming the inhibition of a previously performed task when re-engaging it and 
restarting a sequence of tasks after a period of interruption. Behaviorally, 
these processes were reflected in the facts that: (i) switching to a recently 
performed task, that is thus unlikely to have fully recovered from inhibition, 
takes longer than switching to a task less recently performed and (ii) 
re-engaging in a sequence of tasks after a period of interruption transiently 
increases response time. Using event-related functional MRI, we found that these 
two behavioral effects were accompanied by a double dissociation: the right 
lateral prefrontal cortex was more activated when switching to a task recently 
performed compared to a task less recently performed, while the anterior 
cingulate cortex was recruited when a sequence of tasks was initiated. These 
results provide insights into the functional organization of the frontal lobe in 
humans and its role in distinct processes involved in cognitive control.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.222193299
PMCID: PMC137928
PMID: 12391312 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


640. Clin Neurophysiol. 2006 Oct;117(10):2172-90. doi: 10.1016/j.clinph.2006.06.716. 
Epub 2006 Aug 22.

Switching between univalent task-sets in schizophrenia: ERP evidence of an 
anticipatory task-set reconfiguration deficit.

Karayanidis F(1), Nicholson R, Schall U, Meem L, Fulham R, Michie PT.

Author information:
(1)Functional Neuroimaging Laboratory, School of Psychology, University of 
Newcastle, Callaghan, NSW 2308, Australia. frini.karayanidis@newcastle.edu.au

OBJECTIVE: The present study used behavioral and event-related potential (ERP) 
indices of task-switching to examine whether schizophrenia patients have a 
specific deficit in anticipatory task-set reconfiguration.
METHODS: Participants switched between univalent tasks in an alternating runs 
paradigms with blocked response-stimulus interval (RSI) manipulation (150, 300, 
600, and 1200ms). Nineteen high functioning people with schizophrenia were 
compared to controls that were matched for age, gender, education and premorbid 
IQ estimate.
RESULTS: Schizophrenia patients had overall increased RT, but no increase in 
corrected RT switch cost. In the schizophrenia group, ERPs showed reduced 
activation of the differential positivity in anticipation of switch trial at the 
optimal 600ms RSI and reduced activation of the frontal post-stimulus switch 
negativity at both 600 and 1200ms RSI compared to the control group.
CONCLUSIONS: Despite no behavioral differences in task switching performance, 
anticipatory and stimulus-triggered ERP indices of task-switching suggest group 
differences in processing of switch and repeat trials, especially at longer RSI 
conditions that for control participants provide opportunity for anticipatory 
activation of task-set reconfiguration processes.
SIGNIFICANCE: These results are compatible with impaired implementation of 
endogenously driven processes in schizophrenia and greater reliance on external 
task cues, especially at long preparation intervals.

DOI: 10.1016/j.clinph.2006.06.716
PMID: 16926110 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


641. PLoS One. 2017 Jul 31;12(7):e0181961. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0181961. 
eCollection 2017.

Glutamate/GABA+ ratio is associated with the psychosocial domain of autistic and 
schizotypal traits.

Ford TC(1), Nibbs R(2), Crewther DP(1).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Human Psychopharmacology, Faculty of Heath, Arts and Design, 
Swinburne University of Technology, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia.
(2)Swinburne Neuroimaging, Faculty of Heath, Arts and Design, Swinburne 
University of Technology, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia.

BACKGROUND: The autism and schizophrenia spectra overlap to a large degree in 
the social and interpersonal domains. Similarly, abnormal excitatory glutamate 
and inhibitory γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA) neurotransmitter concentrations have 
been reported for both spectra, with the interplay of these neurotransmitters 
important for cortical excitation to inhibition regulation. This study 
investigates whether these neurotransmitter abnormalities are specific to the 
shared symptomatology, and whether the degree of abnormality increases with 
increasing symptom severity. Hence, the relationship between the glutamate/GABA 
ratio and autism and schizophrenia spectrum traits in an unmedicated, 
subclinical population was investigated.
METHODS: A total of 37 adults (19 female, 18 male) aged 18-38 years completed 
the Autism Spectrum Quotient (AQ) and Schizotypal Personality Questionnaire 
(SPQ), and participated in the resting state proton magnetic resonance 
spectroscopy study in which sequences specific for quantification of glutamate 
and GABA+ concentration were applied to a right and left superior temporal 
voxel.
RESULTS: There were significant, moderate, positive relationships between right 
superior temporal glutamate/GABA+ ratio and AQ, SPQ and AQ+SPQ total scores 
(p<0.05), SPQ subscales Social Anxiety, No Close Friend, Constricted Affect, Odd 
Behaviour, Odd Speech, Ideas of Reference and Suspiciousness, and AQ subscales 
Social Skills, Communication and Attention Switching (p<0.05); increased 
glutamate/GABA+ coinciding with higher scores on these subscales. Only the 
relationships between glutamate/GABA+ ratio and Social Anxiety, Constricted 
Affect, Social Skills and Communication survived multiple comparison correction 
(p< 0.004). Left superior temporal glutamate/GABA+ ratio reduced with increasing 
restricted imagination (p<0.05).
CONCLUSION: These findings demonstrate evidence for an association between 
excitatory/inhibitory neurotransmitter concentrations and symptoms that are 
shared between the autism and schizophrenia spectra.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0181961
PMCID: PMC5536272
PMID: 28759626 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.


642. Psychiatry Res. 2024 Feb;332:115717. doi: 10.1016/j.psychres.2024.115717. Epub 
2024 Jan 3.

Prospective associations between cognitive flexibility and eating disorder 
symptoms in anorexia nervosa and bulimia nervosa.

Dougherty EN(1), Bottera AR(2), Forester G(3), Schaefer LM(4), Forbes EE(5), 
Wildes JE(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Neuroscience, University of Chicago, 
5841 S Maryland Ave, Chicago, IL 60637, United States.
(2)Department of Psychology, University of Kansas, 1415 Jayhawk Blvd., Lawrence, 
KS 66045, United States.
(3)Center for Biobehavioral Research, Sanford Research, 120 8th St. S, Fargo, ND 
48103, United States.
(4)Center for Biobehavioral Research, Sanford Research, 120 8th St. S, Fargo, ND 
48103, United States; Department of Psychiatry, University of North Dakota 
School of Medicine and Health Sciences, 1301 N Columbia Rd Stop 9037, Grand 
Forks, ND 58202, United States.
(5)Department of Psychiatry, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, 3811 
O'Hara Street, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, United States.
(6)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Neuroscience, University of Chicago, 
5841 S Maryland Ave, Chicago, IL 60637, United States; Department of Psychiatry, 
University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, 3811 O'Hara Street, Pittsburgh, PA 
15213, United States. Electronic address: jwildes@uchicago.edu.

This study investigated concurrent and prospective associations between measures 
of reversal learning and attentional set-shifting and eating disorder symptoms 
at baseline, 3 months, and 6 months among individuals with anorexia nervosa 
restricting subtype (AN-R, n = 26), AN binge eating/purging subtype (AN-BP, 
n = 22), bulimia nervosa (BN, n = 35), and healthy controls (n = 27), and 
explored whether these associations differed by diagnosis. At baseline, 
participants completed diagnostic interviews, height/weight measurements, and 
measures of set-shifting (the Intradimensional/Extradimensional shift task) and 
reversal learning (a probabilistic reversal learning task). At 3- and 6-month 
follow-up, participants with eating disorders completed assessments of weight 
and eating disorder symptoms. A one-way analysis of variance found no evidence 
that baseline reversal learning and attentional set-shifting differed across 
diagnostic groups. Multilevel modeling analyses indicated that perseverative 
errors (an index of reversal learning) predicted an increase in purging over 
time for individuals with AN-BP and BN. Set-shifting errors differentially 
predicted frequency of loss of control eating for individuals with AN-BP and BN; 
however, set-shifting was not related to loss of control eating when examined 
separately in AN-BP and BN. These findings suggest that disentangling facets of 
cognitive flexibility may help understand change in eating disorder symptoms.

Copyright © 2024 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.psychres.2024.115717
PMCID: PMC10872327
PMID: 38183925 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest None of the 
authors report any conflicts of interest with this work.


643. Eur J Neurosci. 2019 Oct;50(7):3205-3220. doi: 10.1111/ejn.14435. Epub 2019 Jun 
13.

Switch costs in inhibitory control and voluntary behaviour: A computational 
study of the antisaccade task.

Aponte EA(1), Stephan KE(1)(2)(3), Heinzle J(1).

Author information:
(1)Translational Neuromodeling Unit (TNU), Institute for Biomedical Engineering, 
University of Zurich and ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.
(2)Wellcome Centre for Human Neuroimaging, University College London, London, 
UK.
(3)Max Planck Institute for Metabolism Research, Cologne, Germany.

An integral aspect of human cognition is the ability to inhibit stimulus-driven, 
habitual responses, in favour of complex, voluntary actions. In addition, humans 
can also alternate between different tasks. This comes at the cost of degraded 
performance when compared to repeating the same task, a phenomenon called the 
"task-switch cost." While task switching and inhibitory control have been 
studied extensively, the interaction between them has received relatively little 
attention. Here, we used the SERIA model, a computational model of antisaccade 
behaviour, to draw a bridge between them. We investigated task switching in two 
versions of the mixed antisaccade task, in which participants are cued to 
saccade either in the same or in the opposite direction to a peripheral 
stimulus. SERIA revealed that stopping a habitual action leads to increased 
inhibitory control that persists onto the next trial, independently of the 
upcoming trial type. Moreover, switching between tasks induces slower and less 
accurate voluntary responses compared to repeat trials. However, this only 
occurs when participants lack the time to prepare the correct response. 
Altogether, SERIA demonstrates that there is a reconfiguration cost associated 
with switching between voluntary actions. In addition, the enhanced inhibition 
that follows antisaccade but not prosaccade trials explains asymmetric switch 
costs. In conclusion, SERIA offers a novel model of task switching that unifies 
previous theoretical accounts by distinguishing between inhibitory control and 
voluntary action generation and could help explain similar phenomena in 
paradigms beyond the antisaccade task.

© 2019 Federation of European Neuroscience Societies and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/ejn.14435
PMID: 31081574 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


644. Front Psychol. 2014 Apr 30;5:383. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2014.00383. eCollection 
2014.

Reactive control processes contributing to residual switch cost and mixing cost 
across the adult lifespan.

Whitson LR(1), Karayanidis F(1), Fulham R(1), Provost A(1), Michie PT(1), 
Heathcote A(1), Hsieh S(2).

Author information:
(1)Functional Neuroimaging Laboratory, School of Psychology, University of 
Newcastle Callaghan, NSW, Australia ; Centre for Translational Neuroscience and 
Mental Health Research, The University of Newcastle Callaghan, NSW, Australia ; 
Hunter Medical Research Institute, New Lambton Heights NSW, Australia.
(2)Department of Psychology and Institute of Allied Health Sciences, National 
Cheng Kung University Tainan City, Taiwan.

In task-switching paradigms, performance is better when repeating the same task 
than when alternating between tasks (switch cost) and when repeating a task 
alone rather than intermixed with another task (mixing cost). These costs remain 
even after extensive practice and when task cues enable advanced preparation 
(residual costs). Moreover, residual reaction time mixing cost has been 
consistently shown to increase with age. Residual switch and mixing costs 
modulate the amplitude of the stimulus-locked P3b. This mixing effect is 
disproportionately larger in older adults who also prepare more for and respond 
more cautiously on these "mixed" repeat trials (Karayanidis et al., 2011). In 
this paper, we analyze stimulus-locked and response-locked P3 and lateralized 
readiness potentials to identify whether residual switch and mixing cost arise 
from the need to control interference at the level of stimulus processing or 
response processing. Residual mixing cost was associated with control of 
stimulus-level interference, whereas residual switch cost was also associated 
with a delay in response selection. In older adults, the disproportionate 
increase in mixing cost was associated with greater interference at the level of 
decision-response mapping and response programming for repeat trials in 
mixed-task blocks. These findings suggest that older adults strategically 
recruit greater proactive and reactive control to overcome increased 
susceptibility to post-stimulus interference. This interpretation is consistent 
with recruitment of compensatory strategies to compensate for reduced repetition 
benefit rather than an overall decline on cognitive flexibility.

DOI: 10.3389/fpsyg.2014.00383
PMCID: PMC4012181
PMID: 24817859


645. Brain Stimul. 2020 Jan-Feb;13(1):105-108. doi: 10.1016/j.brs.2019.08.016. Epub 
2019 Aug 31.

Dopamine depletion effects on cognitive flexibility as modulated by tDCS of the 
dlPFC.

Borwick C(1), Lal R(1), Lim LW(2), Stagg CJ(3), Aquili L(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Sociology and Politics, Sheffield Hallam 
University, Sheffield, UK.
(2)School of Biomedical Sciences, Li Ka Shing Faculty of Medicine, The 
University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam, Hong Kong, SAR, China.
(3)Oxford Centre for Human Brain Activity, Wellcome Centre for Integrative 
Neuroimaging, Department of Psychiatry, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK; MRC 
Brain Network Dynamics Unit, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.
(4)Department of Psychology, Sociology and Politics, Sheffield Hallam 
University, Sheffield, UK. Electronic address: luca.aquili@shu.ac.uk.

BACKGROUND: Recent evidence suggests that transcranial direct current 
stimulation (tDCS) may interact with the dopaminergic system to affect cognitive 
flexibility. Objective/hypotheses: We examined whether putative reduction of 
dopamine levels through the acute phenylalanine/tyrosine depletion (APTD) 
procedure and excitatory anodal tDCS of the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex 
(dlPFC) are causally related to cognitive flexibility as measured by task 
switching and reversal learning.
METHOD: A double-blind, sham-controlled, randomised trial was conducted to test 
the effects of combining anodal tDCS and depletion of catecholaminergic 
precursor tyrosine on cognitive flexibility.
RESULTS: Anodal tDCS and tyrosine depletion had a significant effect on task 
switching, but not reversal learning. Whilst perseverative errors were 
significantly improved by anodal tDCS, the APTD impaired reaction times. 
Importantly, the combination of APTD and anodal tDCS resulted in cognitive 
performance which did not statistically differ to that of the control condition.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that the effects of tDCS on cognitive 
flexibility are modulated by dopaminergic tone.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.brs.2019.08.016
PMCID: PMC7116421
PMID: 31494070 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest: None


646. Neuropharmacology. 2012 Jun;62(7):2409-12. doi: 
10.1016/j.neuropharm.2012.01.026. Epub 2012 Feb 13.

The histone deacetylase inhibitor, sodium butyrate, alleviates cognitive 
deficits in pre-motor stage PD.

Rane P(1), Shields J, Heffernan M, Guo Y, Akbarian S, King JA.

Author information:
(1)Center for Comparative NeuroImaging, University of Massachusetts Medical 
School, 55 Lake Avenue North, Worcester, MA 01655, USA.

Parkinson's disease (PD) patients often times experience impairment in their 
cognitive abilities early on in the progression of the disease. The reported 
deficits appear to mainly involve functions that are associated with frontal 
lobe and frontal-striatal pathways subserving attentional set-shifting, working 
memory and executive function. The current study explored executive function 
deficits in a rat model of PD in the pre-motor deficit stage. The rats were 
lesioned with 12 μg of 6-hydroxydonpamine (6-OHDA) in the striatum in a two step 
process (10 μg/μl followed by 2 μg/μl) 48 hours apart. Executive function was 
tested at 3 weeks post-surgery using a rat analogue of Wisconsin card sorting 
test called the Extra Dimensional/Intra Dimensional (ED/ID) set-shifting task. 
The results demonstrated that performance by the pre-motor rat model of PD was 
equivalent to that of the control groups in the simple and the compound 
discriminations as well as the intra-dimensional set-shifting. However the PD 
group exhibited attentional set-shifting deficits similar to those observed in 
PD patients. Additionally, sodium butyrate, a short chain fatty acid derivative 
and inhibitor of class I and II histone deacetylase (HDACi), was tested as a 
potential therapeutic agent to mitigate the pre-motor cognitive deficits in PD. 
The results indicated that the sodium butyrate treatment not only effectively 
alleviated the set-shifting deficits, but also improved the attentional set 
formation in the treated rats.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuropharm.2012.01.026
PMID: 22353286 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


647. Brain Stimul. 2019 Mar-Apr;12(2):290-295. doi: 10.1016/j.brs.2018.12.001. Epub 
2018 Dec 7.

Catecholaminergic modulation of indices of cognitive flexibility: 
A pharmaco-tDCS study.

Dennison O(1), Gao J(1), Lim LW(2), Stagg CJ(3), Aquili L(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Sociology and Politics, Sheffield Hallam 
University, Sheffield, UK.
(2)School of Biomedical Sciences, Li Ka Shing Faculty of Medicine, The 
University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam, Hong Kong, SAR, China.
(3)Oxford Centre for Human Brain Activity, Wellcome Centre for Integrative 
Neuroimaging, Department of Psychiatry, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.
(4)Department of Psychology, Sociology and Politics, Sheffield Hallam 
University, Sheffield, UK. Electronic address: luca.aquili@shu.ac.uk.

BACKGROUND: Dopaminergic activity within the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex 
(dlPFC) has been implicated in the control of cognitive flexibility. Much of the 
evidence for a causative relationship between cognitive flexibility and dopamine 
has come from animal studies, whilst human data have largely been correlational.
OBJECTIVE/HYPOTHESIS: The current study examines whether changes in dopamine 
levels through tyrosine administration and suppression of dlPFC activity via 
cathodal tDCS could be causally related to cognitive flexibility as measured by 
task switching and reversal learning.
METHODS: Using a crossover, double-blind, sham controlled, counterbalanced, 
randomized trial, we tested the effects of combining cathodal tDCS with 
tyrosine, a catecholaminergic precursor, with appropriate drug and tDCS placebo 
controls, on two measures of cognitive flexibility: probabilistic reversal 
learning, and task switching.
RESULTS: While none of the manipulations had an effect on task switching, there 
was a significant main effect of cathodal tDCS and tyrosine on reversal 
learning. Reversal learning performance was significantly worsened by cathodal 
tDCS compared with sham tDCS, whilst tyrosine significantly improved performance 
compared with placebo. However, there was no significant tDCS × drugs 
interaction. Interestingly, and as predicted by our model, the combined 
administration of tyrosine with cathodal tDCS resulted in performance that was 
equivalent to the control condition (i.e. tDCS sham + placebo).
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest a causative role for dopamine signalling and 
dorsolateral prefrontal cortex activity in regulating indices of cognitive 
flexibility in humans.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.brs.2018.12.001
PMCID: PMC7116420
PMID: 30552060 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest None


648. Cognition. 2021 Nov;216:104863. doi: 10.1016/j.cognition.2021.104863. Epub 2021 
Aug 9.

Seizing the opportunity: Lifespan differences in the effects of the opportunity 
cost of time on cognitive control.

Devine S(1), Neumann C(2), Otto AR(3), Bolenz F(4), Reiter A(5), Eppinger B(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, McGill University, Montreal, Canada; Department of 
Psychology, Concordia University, Montreal, Canada. Electronic address: 
seandamiandevine@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Psychology, McGill University, Montreal, Canada.
(3)Department of Psychology, Concordia University, Montreal, Canada.
(4)Faculty of Psychology, Technische Universität Dresden, Germany.
(5)Faculty of Psychology, Technische Universität Dresden, Germany; Wellcome 
Center for Neuroimaging, University College London, United Kingdom; Max Planck 
UCL Centre for Computational Psychiatry and Ageing Research, United Kingdom.
(6)Department of Psychology, McGill University, Montreal, Canada; Faculty of 
Psychology, Technische Universität Dresden, Germany; PERFORM center, Concordia 
University, Canada.

Previous work suggests that lifespan developmental differences in cognitive 
control reflect maturational and aging-related changes in prefrontal cortex 
functioning. However, complementary explanations exist: It could be that 
children and older adults differ from younger adults in how they balance the 
effort of engaging in control against its potential benefits. Here we test 
whether the degree of cognitive effort expenditure depends on the opportunity 
cost of time (average reward rate per unit time): if the average reward rate is 
high, participants should withhold cognitive effort whereas if it is low, they 
should invest more. In Experiment 1, we examine this hypothesis in children, 
adolescents, younger, and older adults, by applying a reward rate manipulation 
in two cognitive control tasks: a modified Erikson Flanker and a task-switching 
paradigm. We found that young adults and adolescents reflexively withheld effort 
when the opportunity cost of time was high, whereas older adults and, to a 
lesser degree children, invested more resources to accumulate reward as quickly 
as possible. We tentatively interpret these results in terms of age- and 
task-specific differences in the processing of the opportunity cost of time. We 
qualify our findings in a second experiment in younger adults in which we 
address an alternative explanation of our results and show that the observed age 
differences in effort expenditure may not result from differences in task 
difficulty. To conclude, we think that our results present an interesting first 
step at relating opportunity costs to motivational processes across the 
lifespan. We frame the implications of further work in this area within a recent 
developmental model of resource-rationality, which points to developmental sweet 
spots in cognitive control.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cognition.2021.104863
PMID: 34384965 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


649. Psychophysiology. 2018 Mar;55(3). doi: 10.1111/psyp.12814. Epub 2017 Mar 15.

An information theory account of late frontoparietal ERP positivities in 
cognitive control.

Barceló F(1), Cooper PS(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Neuropsychology, University of the Balearic Islands, Mallorca, 
Spain.
(2)Functional Neuroimaging Laboratory, School of Psychology, University of 
Newcastle, Callaghan, Australia.
(3)Priority Research Centre for Brain and Mental Health, University of 
Newcastle, Callaghan, Australia.

ERP research on task switching has revealed distinct transient and sustained 
positive waveforms (latency circa 300-900 ms) while shifting task rules or 
stimulus-response (S-R) mappings. However, it remains unclear whether such 
switch-related positivities show similar scalp topography and index 
context-updating mechanisms akin to those posed for domain-general (i.e., 
classic P300) positivities in many task domains. To examine this question, ERPs 
were recorded from 31 young adults (18-30 years) while they were intermittently 
cued to switch or repeat their perceptual categorization of Gabor gratings 
varying in color and thickness (switch task), or else they performed two 
visually identical control tasks (go/no-go and oddball). Our task cueing 
paradigm examined two temporarily distinct stages of proactive rule updating and 
reactive rule execution. A simple information theory model helped us gauge 
cognitive demands under distinct temporal and task contexts in terms of 
low-level S-R pathways and higher-order rule updating operations. Task demands 
modulated domain-general (indexed by classic oddball P3) and switch 
positivities-indexed by both a cue-locked late positive complex and a sustained 
positivity ensuing task transitions. Topographic scalp analyses confirmed subtle 
yet significant split-second changes in the configuration of neural sources for 
both domain-general P3s and switch positivities as a function of both the 
temporal and task context. These findings partly meet predictions from 
information estimates, and are compatible with a family of P3-like potentials 
indexing functionally distinct neural operations within a common frontoparietal 
"multiple demand" system during the preparation and execution of simple task 
rules.

© 2016 Society for Psychophysiological Research.

DOI: 10.1111/psyp.12814
PMID: 28295342 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


650. J Neurosci. 2019 Aug 14;39(33):6540-6554. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2831-18.2019. 
Epub 2019 Jun 18.

A Neuroanatomical Substrate Linking Perceptual Stability to Cognitive Rigidity 
in Autism.

Watanabe T(1)(2), Lawson RP(3)(4), Walldén YSE(3), Rees G(5)(3).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience, University College London, London WC1N 
3AZ, United Kingdom, takamitsu.watanabe@ucl.ac.uk.
(2)RIKEN Center for Brain Science, Saitama 351-0198, Japan.
(3)Wellcome Centre for Human Neuroimaging, University College London, London 
WC1N 3BG, United Kingdom, and.
(4)Department of Psychology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 3EB, United 
Kingdom.
(5)Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience, University College London, London WC1N 
3AZ, United Kingdom.

Overly stable visual perception seen in individuals with autism spectrum 
disorder (ASD) is related to higher-order core symptoms of the condition. 
However, the neural basis by which these seemingly different symptoms are 
simultaneously observed in individuals with ASD remains unclear. Here, we aimed 
to identify such a neuroanatomical substrate linking perceptual stability to 
autistic cognitive rigidity, a part of core restricted, repetitive behaviors 
(RRBs). First, using a bistable visual perception test, we measured the 
perceptual stability of 22 high-functioning adults with ASD and 22 age-, IQ-, 
and sex-matched typically developing human individuals and confirmed overstable 
visual perception in autism. Next, using a spontaneous task-switching (TS) test, 
we showed that the individuals with ASD were more likely to repeat the same task 
voluntarily and spontaneously, and such rigid TS behavior was associated with 
the severity of their RRB symptoms. We then compared these perceptual and 
cognitive behaviors and found a significant correlation between them for 
individuals with ASD. Finally, we found that this behavioral link was supported 
by a smaller gray matter volume (GMV) of the posterior superior parietal lobule 
(pSPL) in individuals with ASD. Moreover, this smaller GMV in the pSPL was also 
associated with the RRB symptoms and replicated in two independent datasets. Our 
findings suggest that the pSPL could be one of the neuroanatomical mediators of 
cognitive and perceptual inflexibility in autism, which could help a unified 
biological understanding of the mechanisms underpinning diverse symptoms of this 
developmental disorder.SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT Behavioral studies show perceptual 
overstability in autism spectrum disorder (ASD). However, the neural mechanisms 
by which such sensory symptoms can coexist and often correlate with seemingly 
separate core symptoms remain unknown. Here, we have identified such a key 
neuroanatomical substrate. We have revealed that overstable sensory perception 
of individuals with ASD is linked with their cognitive rigidity, a part of core 
restricted, repetitive behavior symptoms, and such a behavioral link is 
underpinned by a smaller gray matter volume in the posterior superior parietal 
lobule in autism. These findings uncover a key neuroanatomical mediator of 
autistic perceptual and cognitive inflexibility and would ignite future studies 
on how the core symptoms of ASD interact with its unique sensory perception.

Copyright © 2019 Watanabe et al.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2831-18.2019
PMCID: PMC6697400
PMID: 31213484 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


651. Brain Behav. 2018 Jun;8(6):e00988. doi: 10.1002/brb3.988. Epub 2018 Apr 25.

Enhanced switching and familial susceptibility for psychosis.

Sabb FW(1), Hellemann G(2), Allen NB(3), Bearden CE(2)(4).

Author information:
(1)Lewis Center for Neuroimaging, University of Oregon, Eugene, Oregon.
(2)Semel Institute for Neuroscience and Human Behavior, UCLA, Los Angeles, 
California.
(3)Department of Psychology, University of Oregon, Eugene, Oregon.
(4)Brain Research Institute, UCLA, Los Angeles, California.

INTRODUCTION: Working Memory and Task-Switching are essential components of 
cognitive control, which underlies many symptoms evident across multiple 
neuropsychiatric disorders, including psychotic and mood disorders. 
Vulnerability to these disorders has a substantial genetic component, suggesting 
that clinically unaffected first-degree relatives may carry some 
vulnerability-related traits. Converging evidence from animal and human studies 
demonstrates that dopamine transmission, striatal and frontal brain regions, and 
attention and switching behaviors are essential components of a multilevel 
circuit involved in salience, and disruptions in that circuit may lead to 
features of psychosis. Yet, it is possible that unaffected relatives may also 
possess characteristics that protect against development of illness. We 
hypothesized that reduced switch cost in a cued task-switching task, may be a 
behavioral expression of this "resilience" phenotype that will be observable in 
unaffected relatives.
METHODS: We tested a large community sample (n = 536) via the web, to assess 
different subcomponents of cognitive control, including task-switching and 
working memory, as well as risk-taking, among individuals who report having an 
affected relative with a psychotic or mood disorder.
RESULTS: Healthy individuals with suspected genetic risk due to a self-reported 
familial history of a psychotic disorder demonstrated better task-switching 
performance compared to healthy people without a psychiatrically ill relative 
and those with a relative with a mood disorder. This result was specific to 
illness status and task domain, in that individuals with a personal history of 
depression or anxiety did not show improved task-switching performance, and this 
improvement was selective to task-switching and not seen in other putative 
cognitive control domains (working memory or risk taking).
CONCLUSIONS: Although this study has limitations and independent replication is 
needed, these preliminary findings suggest a potential avenue for understanding 
susceptibility to these disorders by highlighting possible protective as well as 
vulnerability-related aspects of risk phenotypes.

© 2018 The Authors. Brain and Behavior published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/brb3.988
PMCID: PMC5991556
PMID: 30106252 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


652. PLoS One. 2015 May 27;10(5):e0125359. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0125359. 
eCollection 2015.

Afternoon nap and bright light exposure improve cognitive flexibility post 
lunch.

Slama H(1), Deliens G(2), Schmitz R(3), Peigneux P(4), Leproult R(4).

Author information:
(1)UR2NF - Neuropsychology and Functional Neuroimaging Research Group at CRCN 
-Center for Research in Cognition and Neurosciences and UNI - ULB Neurosciences 
Institute, Université Libre de Bruxelles (ULB), Brussels, Belgium; UNESCOG - 
Research Unit in Cognitive Neurosciences at CRCN - Center for Research in 
Cognition and Neurosciences and UNI - ULB Neurosciences Institute, Université 
Libre de Bruxelles (ULB), Brussels, Belgium.
(2)UR2NF - Neuropsychology and Functional Neuroimaging Research Group at CRCN 
-Center for Research in Cognition and Neurosciences and UNI - ULB Neurosciences 
Institute, Université Libre de Bruxelles (ULB), Brussels, Belgium; CO3 - 
Consciousness, Cognition & Computation Group at CRCN - Center for Research in 
Cognition and Neurosciences and UNI - ULB Neurosciences Institute, Université 
Libre de Bruxelles (ULB), Brussels, Belgium.
(3)UR2NF - Neuropsychology and Functional Neuroimaging Research Group at CRCN 
-Center for Research in Cognition and Neurosciences and UNI - ULB Neurosciences 
Institute, Université Libre de Bruxelles (ULB), Brussels, Belgium; LABNIC - 
Laboratory for Neurology and Imaging of Cognition, Department of Neuroscience 
and Clinic of Neurology, Campus Biotech, University of Geneva, Geneva, 
Switzerland.
(4)UR2NF - Neuropsychology and Functional Neuroimaging Research Group at CRCN 
-Center for Research in Cognition and Neurosciences and UNI - ULB Neurosciences 
Institute, Université Libre de Bruxelles (ULB), Brussels, Belgium.

Beneficial effects of napping or bright light exposure on cognitive performance 
have been reported in participants exposed to sleep loss. Nonetheless, few 
studies investigated the effect of these potential countermeasures against the 
temporary drop in performance observed in mid-afternoon, and even less so on 
cognitive flexibility, a crucial component of executive functions. This study 
investigated the impact of either an afternoon nap or bright light exposure on 
post-prandial alterations in task switching performance in well-rested 
participants. Twenty-five healthy adults participated in two randomized 
experimental conditions, either wake versus nap (n=15), or bright light versus 
placebo (n=10). Participants were tested on a switching task three times 
(morning, post-lunch and late afternoon sessions). The interventions occurred 
prior to the post-lunch session. In the nap/wake condition, participants either 
stayed awake watching a 30-minute documentary or had the opportunity to take a 
nap for 30 minutes. In the bright light/placebo condition, participants watched 
a documentary under either bright blue light or dim orange light (placebo) for 
30 minutes. The switch cost estimates cognitive flexibility and measures 
task-switching efficiency. Increased switch cost scores indicate higher 
difficulties to switch between tasks. In both control conditions (wake or 
placebo), accuracy switch-cost score increased post lunch. Both interventions 
(nap or bright light) elicited a decrease in accuracy switch-cost score post 
lunch, which was associated with diminished fatigue and decreased variability in 
vigilance. Additionally, there was a trend for a post-lunch benefit of bright 
light with a decreased latency switch-cost score. In the nap group, improvements 
in accuracy switch-cost score were associated with more NREM sleep stage N1. 
Thus, exposure to bright light during the post-lunch dip, a countermeasure 
easily applicable in daily life, results in similar beneficial effects as a 
short nap on performance in the cognitive flexibility domain with possible 
additional benefits on latency switch-cost scores.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0125359
PMCID: PMC4446306
PMID: 26016658 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: This commercial source 
provided the light emitting systems for our experiments. No constraints were 
associated with this donation; the commercial source was not involved in the 
protocol design, the analyses or the writing of the manuscript, and the 
experiments were conducted without any intervention of this commercial source. 
All of the authors state that they are not involved in any employment, 
remunerated consultancy, patents or products with this commercial donor. This 
does not alter the authors' adherence to PLOS ONE policies on sharing data and 
materials.